--- Page 1 ---
SplitFlow: Flow Decomposition for Inversion-Free
Text-to-Image Editing
Sung-Hoon Yoon1*, Minghan Li1*, Gaspard Beaudouin2, Congcong Wen1,3,
Muhammad Rafay Azhar1, and Mengyu Wang1,4†
1Harvard AI and Robotics Lab, Harvard University
2École des Ponts, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 3New York University Abu Dhabi
4Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University
{syoon13,mli4}@meei.harvard.edu, gaspard.beaudouin@eleves.enpc.fr,
cwen2@meei.harvard.edu, rafayazhar@college.harvard.edu,
mengyu_wang@meei.harvard.edu
Abstract
Rectified flow models have become a de facto standard in image generation due to
their stable sampling trajectories and high-fidelity outputs. Despite their strong gen-
erative capabilities, they face critical limitations in image editing tasks: inaccurate
inversion processes for mapping real images back into the latent space, and gradient
entanglement issues during editing often result in outputs that do not faithfully
reflect the target prompt. Recent efforts have attempted to directly map source
and target distributions via ODE-based approaches without inversion; however,
these methods still yield suboptimal editing quality. In this work, we propose
a flow decomposition-and-aggregation framework built upon an inversion-free
formulation to address these limitations. Specifically, we semantically decompose
the target prompt into multiple sub-prompts, compute an independent flow for
each, and aggregate them to form a unified editing trajectory. While we empirically
observe that decomposing the original flow enhances diversity in the target space,
generating semantically aligned outputs still requires consistent guidance toward
the full target prompt. To this end, we design a projection and soft-aggregation
mechanism for flow, inspired by gradient conflict resolution in multi-task learn-
ing. This approach adaptively weights the sub-target velocity fields, suppressing
semantic redundancy while emphasizing distinct directions, thereby preserving
both diversity and consistency in the final edited output. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms existing zero-shot editing approaches in
terms of semantic fidelity and attribute disentanglement. The code is available at
https://github.com/Harvard-AI-and-Robotics-Lab/SplitFlow.
1
Introduction
Flow-based generative models have demonstrated superiority in synthesizing images and also in
text-to-image generation task. Building on these advances, recent research has actively explored
image editing methods that modify a given image to align with a target prompt. Due to the nature
of diffusion [20, 7, 23] and flow-based generative models [1, 13, 15] , which generate samples
from noise through iterative refinement, editing typically requires an inversion step to estimate
the corresponding noisy latent representation. However, this inversion process is often imperfect
and fails to recover an exact latent that reconstructs the original image. As a result, the editing
process may suffer from semantic drift, visual distortion, or inconsistent attribute manipulation. Even
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

--- Page 2 ---
when a precise inversion allows near-perfect reconstruction, an empirical trade-off arises between
reconstructability and editability. Latents that are highly optimized to match the input image tend to
be rigid and entangled, meaning that adjusting a single attribute often leads to unintended changes in
unrelated features [2].
Recently, some efforts have been made to improve the editing process based on rectified flow
models [19, 26, 3, 29, 31] and also inversion-free method that directly maps the source and target
distribution [11], but these methods show limited semantic fidelity due to gradient entanglement and
prompt-latent misalignment. In particular, when a complex target prompt contains multiple semantic
attributes (e.g., "a german shepard dog with black sunglasses jumping on the grass with mouth
opened"), a single editing trajectory guided by the full prompt often leads to entangled gradients and
conflicting directions in the semantic space. This makes it difficult to isolate and control the influence
of individual attributes, resulting in either under-edited or overly distorted outputs.
Motivated by these issues, we propose SplitFlow, which decomposes the flow induced by the target
prompt into independent sub-target flows derived from semantically decomposed sub-prompts. By
computing independent editing flows for each sub-prompt and aggregating them into a unified
trajectory while mitigating flow conflict, our method achieves improvements in both fidelity and
editability. Performance on the PIE-Bench benchmark [10] demonstrates that the proposed approach
outperforms prior methods.
The contributions of this paper are threefold:
• We demonstrate that decomposing the editing flow improves the fidelity of the edited image,
especially in preserving background consistency.
• We propose SplitFlow, which progressively approximates the target latent through flow
decomposition followed by flow aggregation.
• We introduce a projection-and-aggregation method that aligns sub-target flows with the
target direction, while preserving their semantic diversity and alleviating potential conflicts
velocity field that arise during integration.
2
Related Work
Diffusion and Rectified Flow.
Diffusion models [21, 18] synthesize images by gradually reversing
a noising process that transforms data into Gaussian noise. Starting from random noise, they
iteratively denoise through learned score functions, generating high-quality outputs over many
timesteps. Rectified Flow (RF) [13, 15] introduces a more stable and efficient generation process via
a straight trajectory in latent space.
Text-to-Image Inversion and Editing.
Text-guided image editing aims to modify a given image to
match a target text prompt. Most diffusion-based editing pipelines rely on first mapping the image
back into the model’s latent space, typically in the form of Gaussian noise. DDIM [21] enables
approximate inversion via a deterministic trajectory, but suffers from cumulative errors due to its
linear approximation. To improve inversion accuracy, optimization-based approaches [16, 25, 8]
have been proposed, though at a high computational cost. On the editing side, early methods achieve
localized edits by fine-tuning diffusion models [5, 12] or manipulating cross-attention maps [6, 24].
While effective, these methods still operate within the diffusion framework and depend heavily on
either inversion or fine-tuning, which are often inefficient for practical use.
Recent efforts have explored RF models for editing, which offer more stable and efficient sampling
trajectories than diffusion models. RF-Inversion [19] formulates editing as an optimal control problem
to balance editability and fidelity, RF-Solver [26] incorporates attention injection to guide editing,
and FireFlow [3] employs higher-order ODE solvers to improve inversion accuracy. Despite their
advantages, these methods still depend on iterative re-noising procedures, making them prone to
cumulative error. FTEdit [29] reduces errors by performing iterative average at each inversion
timestep, which is basically equivalent to increasing the number of sampling steps.
Inversion-Free Editing.
Unlike traditional inversion-based approaches, which require recovering
the noise latent that originally generated the image, inversion-free methods bypass this step and
directly optimize in the image or latent space. InfEdit [30] introduces an early inversion-free
2

--- Page 3 ---
framework based on the consistency models [22]. FlowEdit [11] extends this idea to RF models
by directly manipulating image-space velocity differences. However, it lacks directional selectivity
and often struggles with global edits. These works highlight that explicitly modeling semantic flow
differences enhances editing control and efficiency.
Multi-Task and Flow Decomposition.
Our method builds upon insights from gradient conflict
resolution in multi-task learning [32, 17, 14], where conflicting objectives are resolved via adaptive
re-weighting. Similarly, we propose to semantically decompose the target prompt into multiple
sub-flows and adaptively aggregate them for consistent and diverse edits. To our knowledge, our
work is the first to incorporate flow decomposition and aggregation into text-based image editing
framework.
3
Preliminaries
3.1
Flow Matching and Rectified Flow
Let Rd denote the data space, and let x0 ∈Rd be an initial data point sampled from a source
distribution p0. Flow Matching (FM) methods [15, 13, 1] aim to learn a time-dependent vector field
vθ(xt, t) : [0, 1] × Rd →Rd, such that the solution to the following ODE transports x0 ∼p0 to
x1 ∼p1, where p1 denotes the target distribution:
dxt = vθ(xt, t)dt
(1)
The solution xt describes a continuous trajectory defined by the ODE, starting from the initial point
x0 and reaching the target point x1. The ground-truth vector field v∗(xt, t) governs this trajectory
and induces a distributional path xt that satisfies the boundary conditions xt=0 = x0 and xt=1 = x1.
The objective of FM is to learn a parameterized vector field vθ(xt, t) that approximates v∗(xt, t) by
minimizing the following regression loss:
L(θ) = Ext,t[∥vθ(xt, t) −v∗(xt, t)∥2
2],
(2)
where ||·||2
2 denotes mean square error. Here, FM enables deterministic sampling via ODEs, avoiding
the stochastic noise accumulation seen in diffusion models. By leveraging known couplings between
distributions, it ensures both interpretability and fidelity. This leads to faster, more stable sampling and
a principled connection to optimal transport, making FM a strong candidate for generative modeling.
Rectified Flow (RF) [15], a special case of FM, aims to learn an ODE whose solution closely follows
straight-line trajectories between pairs of points sampled from x0 and x1. The ground-truth vector
field is defined as v∗(xt, t) = x1 −x0, where xt is the linear interpolation between x0 and x1. The
training objective can thus be formulated as:
L(θ) = Ext,t ∥vθ(xt, t) −(x1 −x0)∥2
2 ,
where
xt = (1 −t)x0 + tx1.
(3)
By eliminating the need for stochastic sampling and instead following deterministic linear paths,
RF enables faster and more stable performance in downstream tasks such as ODE-based generative
modeling and image editing.
3.2
Inversion-free Image Editing
Image editing aims to transform a source image xsrc
0 , guided by a source text prompt φsrc, into an
edited image xtgt
0
using a target text prompt φtgt. In RF, the trajectory between noise and image
is assumed to be linear, meaning that the noisy latent at any timestep can be obtained via linear
interpolation. Leveraging this property, inversion-free image editing method [11] bypass the need
for latent inversion by estimating the vector field difference between the source and target images at
each timestep. This enables the construction of a transition path in the clean image space, gradually
mapping the source image toward the target. Specifically, the target-aligned latent at timestep t,
denoted as xFE
t
, can be approximated by:
xFE
t
= xsrc
0
+ xtgt
t
−xsrc
t
.
(4)
The evolution of this trajectory follows the ODE:
dxFE
t
= v∆
θ (xtgt
t , xsrc
t
) dt ≈v∆
θ (xFE
t−1 + xsrc
t
−xsrc
0 , xsrc
t
) dt,
(5)
3

--- Page 4 ---
Composition
(Sec. 4.2)
Target caption:
A german shephard dog [with black sunglasses] 
[jumping] on the grass with mouth [opened]
Source caption: 
A german shephard dog stands on the grass with 
mouth [closed]
A german shepard dog with black sunglass
A black sunglasses dog jumps grass
A dog with open mouth jump grass
LLM 
(     or etc)
“Write semantic captions that 
split the target caption.”
Decomposition
(Sec. 4.1)
Figure 1: Simplified visual illustration of the proposed SplitFlow. Purple, Blue, Orange line indicates
independent sub-target flow. The aggregation is done on a certain timestep. After the aggregation, we
use a single, unified flow. The notation in this figure follows the paper.
where the difference in velocity fields guided by the source and target prompts is defined as:
v∆
t (xtgt
t , xsrc
t
) = vθ(xtgt
t , t, φtgt) −vθ(xsrc
t
, t, φsrc). Since the source image is known, xsrc
t
can be
directly obtained by linearly interpolating between it and a randomly sampled noise. In contrast, the
target image is unknown and cannot be directly interpolated. Therefore, xtgt
t
is approximated using
the previous timestep xFE
t−1 and Eq. (4) as follows: xtgt
t
≈xFE
t−1 + xsrc
t
−xsrc
0 .
Based on the estimated velocity field difference, the entire editing process can be implemented as an
iterative trajectory in the clean image space. Starting from the source image, we initialize the path
with xFE
0
= xsrc
0 . At each timestep t, the edited latent is updated using the approximated velocity
difference: xFE
t−1 = xFE
t
+ ∆tv∆
θ (xtgt
t , xsrc
t
). This iterative procedure continues until the trajectory
converges to the desired target image.
4
Method
Long target prompts often contain multiple attributes and complex semantics, resulting in a large
semantic gap between the source and target in the latent space. This gap makes direct editing
challenging, as entangled gradients can degrade edit quality. Providing simultaneous guidance for all
attributes may lead to conflicting flows, which can cause semantic drift or even failure in the editing
process. To address this challenge, we propose SplitFlow, an editing framework that progressively
approximates the target latent through flow decomposition (Sec. 4.1) followed by flow composition
(Sec. 4.2). Specifically, we first decompose the semantic complexity of the target prompt into a set of
sub-target prompts and compute an independent flow for each, enabling latent directional components
to be isolated and manipulated separately. These sub-flows are then aggregated into a unified flow
that semantically aligns with the original target prompt. The editing process proceeds along this
unified trajectory, resulting in more stable, diverse edits.
4.1
Progressive Target Approximation with Flow Decomposition
In image editing tasks, the semantic gap between a source prompt φsrc and a target prompt φtgt
is often complex and high-dimensional. Direct transformation from source to target may lead to
unstable or imprecise editing results. To address this, we propose to decompose the overall semantic
transition into a sequence of intermediate sub-target prompts {φtgt(i)}N
i=1, where N is the number of
sub-target prompts. This decomposition simplifies the editing task into semantically controllable and
progressively guided transformations.
To perform the decomposition, we leverage a Large Language Model (LLM) as a prompt reasoning
engine, represented as a function fLLM. We construct a composite input sequence by concatenating
an instruction prompt ψ, the source prompt φsrc, and the target prompt φtgt. Then we feed the input
4

--- Page 5 ---
to fLLM to generate a sequence of sub-target prompts that represent incremental semantic transitions:
{φtgt(i)}N
i=1 = fLLM(Φ),
Φ = concat[ψ, φsrc, φtgt].
(6)
Each sub-target prompt φtgt(i) captures a localized semantic component that contributes to the overall
transformation from φsrc to φtgt. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, given a source prompt φsrc = “A
german shepherd dog stands on the grass with mouth closed” and a target prompt φtgt = “A german
shepherd dog with black sunglasses jumping on the grass with mouth opened”, and instruction prompt
ψ = “Write semantic captions that split the target caption.”, the resulting sub-target prompts may
be: {φtgt(i)}N
i=1 = { “A black sunglasses dog jumps grass”, “A dog with open mouth jump grass”,
“A german shepherd with black sunglasses” }. The number of sub-target prompts N is adaptively
determined by fLLM based on the degree and complexity of the semantic difference. In most cases,
N ≤3, which yields a compact yet effective semantic trajectory for guided editing.
Following the formulation of the baseline (Eq. (4)–(5)), we extend the framework to handle each
sub-target prompt individually. For each sub-target prompt φtgt(i), we define a corresponding flow
xFE(i)
t
governed by an independent velocity field. Specifically, the sub-target flow is expressed as
follows:
xFE(i)
t
= xsrc
0
+ xtgt(i)
t
−xsrc
t
,
(7)
where xsrc
0
denotes the initial latent of the source image, xsrc
t
is the interpolated latents at timestep t
between the source image and a Gaussian noise. Accordingly, the ODE governing each decomposed
sub-target flow is given by the sub-target relative velocity field v∆
t (xtgt(i)
t
, xsrc
t
):
dxFE(i)
t
= v∆
t (xtgt(i)
t
, xsrc
t
) · dt,
v∆
t (xtgt(i)
t
, xsrc
t
) = vθ(xtgt(i)
t
, t, φtgt(i)) −vθ(xsrc
t
, t, φsrc).
Since xtgt(i)
t
is not directly observable during inference, we approximate it based on the previously
updated latent in Eq. (7) as: xtgt(i)
t
≈xFE(i)
t−1
+ xsrc
t
−xsrc
0 . The decomposition phase starts from
ηmax and proceeds until ηdec.
4.2
Flow Composition
While decomposing the flow, as described in Sec. 4.1, allows us to disentangle the gradients and
achieve independent transformations, the ultimate objective in the image editing task is to perform
editing aligned with the target prompt faithfully. Therefore, we devise a method to compose the
previously generated sub-target flows into a unified flow that adheres to the full semantics of the
target prompt. Considering the formulation of the ODE as shown in Eq. 1, the velocity field computed
for each sub-target prompt can be interpreted as a gradient-like vector in latent space that guides
the latent representation toward the target state. In multi-task learning (MTL), it is well known that
gradients from different tasks can conflict, leading to unstable optimization or degraded performance
on each tasks. To address this issue, various strategies such as gradient projection and orthogonality
constraints have been proposed. Inspired by gradient conflict resolution methods [17, 14] in MTL,
we propose a method that mitigates interference between sub-target velocity fields while effectively
achieving the desired image editing objectives.
4.2.1
Latent Trajectory Projection (LTP).
To enforce global semantic consistency with the target flow while maintaining the diversity of each sub-
target flow, we project each sub-target latent (conditioned on φtgt(i)) onto the target latent (conditioned
on φtgt): xFE
t . To perform this projection, we normalize the target latent as ˆxFE
t
= xFE
t
/∥xFE
t
∥2.
Here, the projection of each sub-target latent {xFE(i)
t
}N
i=1 onto ˆxFE
t
is computed as follows:
xproj(i)
t
=

⟨xFE(i)
t
, ˆxFE
t
⟩

ˆxFE
t
,
(8)
where the inner product (⟨·, ·⟩) is computed along the channel dimension of the latent. By projecting
the sub-target latent onto the target latent, we ensure that the overall editing process remains consistent
with the intended semantic shift. We then aggregate the projected sub-target latent to form the
projected latent:
xproj
t
= 1
N
N
X
i=1
xproj(i)
t
.
(9)
5

--- Page 6 ---
While both the target latent xtgt
t
and the projected sub-target latents {xproj(i)
t
}N
i=1 are aligned along
the same semantic direction, their origins differ fundamentally: the former stems from a unified
trajectory conditioned on the full target prompt, whereas the latter are partial trajectories derived
from sub-prompts and aligned through projection. This approach retains the global coherence of the
target trajectory while preserving localized variations introduced by sub-target prompts, enhancing
both semantic consistency and editing diversity.
4.2.2
Velocity Field Aggregation (VFA).
After projection, to further enhance flow diversity, we introduce Velocity Field Aggregation (VFA),
which combines the velocity fields of sub-target flows. To quantify the directional consistency among
sub-target flows, we compute the cosine similarity between their relative velocity fields with respect
to the source latent. Specifically, we first compute the relative velocity vector between xproj(i)
t
and
xsrc
t
as follows:
gi := v∆
t (xproj(i)
t
, xsrc
t
) = vθ(xproj(i)
t
, t, φtgt(i)) −vθ(xsrc
t
, t, φsrc)
(10)
The cosine similarity Sij between the i-th and j-th sub-target prompt is defined as:
Sij =
D
ˆv∆(i)
t
, ˆv∆(j)
t
E
,
ˆv∆(i)
t
=
v∆
t (xproj(i)
t
, xsrc
t
)
∥v∆
t (xproj(i)
t
, xsrc
t
)∥
.
(11)
Here, ˆv∆(i)
t
is the normalized from v∆
t (xproj(i)
t
, xsrc
t
) to compute cosine similarity. This metric cap-
tures the angular agreement between projected velocity directions, thereby reflecting the consistency
of semantic changes introduced by each sub-target prompt. By applying the softmax operation to the
cosine similarity map S ∈RN×N×H×W , we obtain a weight map w ∈RN×H×W that determines
the relative contribution of each velocity field at every spatial location (h, w) in the latent grid:
¯v∆
t (h, w) =
N
X
i=1
wi(h, w) · v∆(i)
t
(h, w),
wi(h, w) =
exp
P
j̸=i Sij(h, w)

P
k exp
P
j̸=k Skj(h, w)
.
(12)
Combining the projected latent from Eq. (9) with the aggregated velocity field ¯v∆
θ , the latent after
aggregation can be updated as follows:
xFE
t
←xproj
t
+ ¯v∆
t · dt.
(13)
Since the proposed VFA adaptively weights the sub-target velocity fields based on their semantic
alignment, it not only suppresses the influence of redundant flows but also emphasizes those with
distinct semantic directions. This enables the model to preserve editing diversity while maintaining
coherent alignment with the target prompt. Also, note that the LTP and VFA are applied at the end of
the decomposition phase (ηdec).
Mathematical Justification of VFA.
Here, we mathematically verify why VFA improves both
fidelity and editability over mere averaging by showing:
⟨¯g, gavg⟩≥||gavg||2,
(14)
where ¯g = PK
i=1 wi gi and gavg = 1
K
PK
i=1 gi. Here, Skj is denoted as ⟨ˆgk, ˆgj⟩and ak = P
j Skj.
We first reformulate Eq. (14) in terms of the scores ai, where the LHS is ⟨¯g, gavg⟩= 1
K
PK
i=1 wiai
and the RHS is ∥gavg∥2 =
1
K2
PK
i=1 ai . Thus, the proposition is equivalent to proving P
i wiai ≥
1
K
P
i ai. The proof combines two standard results. First, from Gibbs’ inequality, the KL-divergence
between the softmax distribution w = {wi} and the uniform distribution u = {1/K} is non-negative,
which implies: PK
i=1 wiai ≥log(Z/K) (14-1), where Z = P
i eai. Second, applying Jensen’s
inequality to the convex function f(x) = ex gives log(E[ea]) ≥E[a], which in our context is:
log(Z/K) = log
 
1
K
K
X
i=1
eai
!
≥1
K
K
X
i=1
ai
(14-2)
6

--- Page 7 ---
Table 1: Quantitative comparison results on PIE benchmark. For each model group (diffusion-based
and flow-based), the best and second-best values are indicated in bold and underlined, respectively.
Ours† is the result with a fidelity-enhanced setting.
Method
Model
Structure
Background Preservation
CLIP Similarity
Editing
Distance ×103 ↓
PSNR ↑
LPIPS ×103 ↓
MSE ×104 ↓
SSIM×102 ↑
Whole ↑
Edited ↑
DDIM [21]
Diffusion
P2P
69.4
17.87
208.80
219.88
71.14
25.01
22.44
DDIM [21]
Diffusion
PnP
28.22
22.28
113.46
83.64
79.05
25.41
22.55
Null-text [16]
Diffusion
P2P
13.44
27.03
60.67
35.86
84.11
24.75
21.86
PnP-Inv [10]
Diffusion
P2P
11.65
27.22
54.55
32.86
84.76
25.02
22.10
PnP-Inv [10]
Diffusion
PnP
24.29
22.46
106.06
80.45
79.68
25.41
22.62
RF-Inversion [19]
Flux
-
40.6
20.82
184.8
129.1
71.92
25.20
22.11
RF-Solver [26]
Flux
RF-Solver
31.1
22.90
135.81
80.11
81.90
26.00
22.88
FireFlow [3]
Flux
RF-Solver
28.3
23.28
120.82
70.39
82.82
25.98
22.94
Flow Edit [11]
Flux
-
27.7
21.91
111.70
94.0
83.39
25.61
22.70
FTEdit [29]
SD3.5
AdaLN
18.17
26.62
80.55
40.24
91.50
25.74
22.27
iRFDS [31]
SD3
-
62.72
19.61
186.39
179.76
74.59
24.54
21.67
FlowEdit [11]
SD3
-
27.24
22.13
105.46
87.34
83.48
26.83
23.67
FlowEdit [11]
SD3.5
-
11.80
26.97
53.68
31.23
89.70
26.18
22.88
SplitFlow(Ours)
SD3
-
25.96
22.45
102.14
81.99
83.91
26.96
23.83
SplitFlow(Ours)†
SD3
-
14.55
25.22
68.53
44.96
87.54
26.23
23.01
SplitFlow(Ours)
SD3.5
-
11.68
27.12
52.93
30.61
89.76
26.29
22.89
Chaining inequalities Eq. (14-1) and Eq. (14-2) directly yields the required result:
K
X
i=1
wiai ≥log(Z/K) ≥1
K
K
X
i=1
ai
This proof formalises why VFA improves both fidelity and editability: It suppresses conflicts, steering
the update toward high-consensus attributes. Empirically, this manifests as higher background
preservation and better CLIP similarity in Table 1-2.
When the decomposition phase is ended, the aggregated latent now follows the ODE formulation
of the target prompt as described in Sec. 3.2. The decomposed flow stages facilitate fine-grained
attribute manipulation without gradient entanglement, while the final unified flow phase ensures
alignment with the holistic editing intent. This hybrid strategy improves editing stability and fidelity
by integrating diversity-aware adjustments with prompt-level consistency. A detailed algorithmic
description of SplitFlow is included in the supplementary material.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental Setup
Implementation Details.
To show the effectiveness of the proposed method and for a fair com-
parison with the prior works, we employed the commonly used Stable Diffusion (SD3, SD3.5) [4]
rectified flow model. By following the protocol of the baseline [11], we use the same T = 50 steps
with ηmax = 33, which skips the first one-third steps. The CFG values for the source and target
are set to 3.5 and 13.5, respectively. The decomposition ηdec is set to 28, which lasts for 5 steps
(ηmax −ηdec). To decompose the target prompt, we used Mistral-7B [9].
Dataset.
We evaluate our method on Prompt-based Image Editing (PIE) Benchmark [10], which
contains 700 images of natural and artificial scenes. In PIE benchmark, ten categories span from
random editing written by volunteers to change image style. Each image includes a source prompt,
target prompt, editing directive, edit subjects, and editing mask.
Baselines and Evaluation Metrics.
As this work focuses on image editing based on rectified
flow, we compare with the State-of-The-Art (SoTA) editing methods; RF-Inversion [19], RF-
Solver [26], FireFlow [3], iRFDS [31], FTEdit [29], and FlowEdit [11]. Diffusion-based models such
as DDIM [21, 16, 10] are also included for comparison. We evaluate our method on the PIE-Bench
dataset using standard metrics. For assessing reconstruction quality and background preservation, we
report image-level metrics: LPIPS [33], SSIM [27], MSE, PSNR, and Structure Distance [10]. To
measure semantic alignment with the target prompt, we use CLIP similarity [28].
7

--- Page 8 ---
Table 2: Ablation study on PIE-benchmark. Here AVG denotes the case where mere average is applied
for latent trajectory aggregation.
Baseline
LTP
VFA
Structure
Background Preservation
CLIP Similarity
Distance ×103 ↓
PSNR ↑
LPIPS ×103 ↓
MSE ×104 ↓
SSIM×102 ↑
Whole ↑
Edited ↑
✓
27.24
22.13
105.46
87.34
83.48
26.83
23.67
AVG
22.28
23.36
92.00
68.26
85.00
26.81
23.67
✓
✓
26.22
22.37
103.58
83.67
83.76
26.93
23.82
✓
✓
✓
25.96
22.45
102.14
81.99
83.91
26.96
23.83
Input
Directinv+P2P
FireFlow
FlowEdit-Flux
FlowEdit-SD3
RFsolver
SplitFlow-SD3
a) Change “plant” to “flower”
b) Change “dumplings” to “sushi”
c) Change “red and white” to “blue and green”
d) Add “with hat”
e) Delete “a single pink lotus flower is growing in the middle of ”
Figure 2: Qualitative comparison of prompt-based image editing methods. Each row corresponds to a
specific editing instruction, where the source prompt is modified into a target prompt. From top to
bottom, the tasks are: (a) change “plant” to “flower”, (b) change “dumpling” to “sushi”, (c) change
"red and white" to "blue and green", (d) add "with hat", (e) delete "a single pink lotus flower is
growing in the middle of". The columns show the input image and the results generated by different
models, including Directinv+P2P, RFsolver, FireFlow, FlowEdit-Flux, FlowEdit-SD3, and SplitFlow.
5.2
Main Results
Comparison with State-of-the-art Methods. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
SplitFlow, we conducted experiments as shown in Table 1. Compared to the FlowEdit [11] and
iRFDS [31], within the same SD3 model, the proposed SplitFlow not only outperforms in preserving
background but also in editing quality. To further demonstrate the effect of the trade-off between
fidelity and editability, we omit the noise interpolation during the decomposition phase and directly
use the source latent xsrc
0
to better preserve structural details of the input image in the fidelity-
enhanced setting†. Compared to the state-of-the-art method FTEdit [29], our SplitFlow† (a fidelity-
enhanced variant) achieves superior performance in both Structure Distance and LPIPS, despite
FTEdit employing a stronger backbone model. Moreover, it significantly outperforms FTEdit in both
CLIP Similarity metrics, demonstrating better alignment with the target prompt. Also, compared
8

--- Page 9 ---
Table 3: Ablation study of aggregation step ηdec on PIE-benchmark.
ηdec
Structure
Background Preservation
CLIP Similarity
Distance ×103 ↓
PSNR ↑
LPIPS ×103 ↓
MSE ×104 ↓
SSIM×102 ↑
Whole ↑
Edited ↑
Baseline
27.24
22.13
105.46
87.34
83.48
26.83
23.67
30
25.99
22.41
102.33
83.06
83.88
26.92
23.79
29
26.13
22.41
102.26
82.66
83.85
26.90
23.71
28
25.96
22.45
102.14
81.99
83.91
26.96
23.83
27
25.96
22.44
102.39
82.15
83.91
26.92
23.85
26
25.94
22.44
102.70
82.27
83.91
26.95
23.84
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison results with more complex prompts.
to the methods based on Flux such as RF-Inversion [19], RF-Solver [26], FireFlow [3], SplitFlow†
outperforms the prior works. Within the SD3.5 model, SplitFlow demonstrates superior background
preservation capability compared to prior works.
Qualitative Comparison. The qualitative comparison results are presented in Fig. 2. Across various
scenarios—including change, add, and delete object prompts—our proposed SplitFlow demonstrates
superior editability while effectively preserving the background. For instance, as shown in Fig. 2-(d),
which involves adding “with hat” to a portrait of Mozart, other methods fail to generate the hat or
distort the original image, whereas our method successfully synthesizes the hat while maintaining the
integrity of the source image. Although it is well known that enhancing editability often compromises
fidelity, our approach achieves a favorable balance by disentangling gradients within the flow during
the editing process with decomposition. In Fig. 3, to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, we provide qualitative comparison results with more complex scenario. In the first row,
given the source prompt “Three giraffes walk in a line through a lush, zoo-like forest path, while
another animal rests near a pond,” the editing prompt requires changing the three giraffes to elephants
and the other animal to a tiger. While FlowEdit fails to convert “three giraffes” to “three elephants,”
our method successfully performs the transformation and better preserves the semantic detail of “in
a line.” Additional qualitative results under complex scenarios are provided in the supplementary
material.
5.3
Detailed Analysis
Component Analysis. To validate the effect of the designed component, we conducted an ablation
study on PIE-benchmark as shown in Table 2. The result of simply averaging the individual flows
after decomposition is reported in the second column of Table 2, denoted as AVG. Interestingly,
even naive averaging of sub-flows maintains CLIP similarity on par with the baseline [11], while
significantly improving background preservation, as reflected in metrics such as PSNR, LPIPS,
MSE, and SSIM. We attribute this to the semantic decoupling effect of sub-flows, which localize
edits to specific attributes and reduce unintended changes in irrelevant regions. While semantic
decomposition and flow separation are key contributions of our work, our overarching objective
extends beyond fidelity enhancement. Our goal is to strike a balance between fidelity and editability,
ensuring that complex, multi-attribute prompts are both faithfully represented and accurately reflected
in the edited outputs. To this end, our proposed components—Latent Trajectory Projection (LTP) and
Velocity Field Aggregation (VFA)—go beyond averaging by explicitly aligning sub-flows with the
global editing direction and adaptively weighting their contributions. By applying LTP to align each
9

--- Page 10 ---
sub-flow with the target flow, we observe meaningful improvements in CLIP similarity, particularly
in the Edited metric, which is computed over the foreground mask. Although LTP results in lower
background preservation compared to simple averaging, it still outperforms the baseline in all
metrics. Furthermore, when VFA is applied, each sub-flow contributes more effectively to the final
trajectory. This not only enhances background preservation—similar to the averaging strategy—but
also improves CLIP similarity by promoting global semantic alignment while preserving diversity
across sub-prompts.
Ablation Study on Aggregation Timestep. In Table 3, we conduct an ablation study on the
aggregation timestep ηdec to evaluate the effectiveness and robustness of SplitFlow. Across all tested
configurations, SplitFlow consistently outperforms the baseline. As ηdec decreases—corresponding
to a longer decomposition period—we observe improved editability at the expense of background
preservation. Considering this trade-off, we set ηdec = 28 for our final configuration. Compared to
the baseline, the total number of steps required by SplitFlow can be calculated as N ×(ηmax −ηdec)+
ηmax. Since N ≤3 in most cases, the inference steps can be approximated as 3×(33−28)+33 = 48.
In practice, FlowEdit requires 57 minutes for inference, whereas SplitFlow takes 83 minutes to
process 700 images on the PIE Benchmark. Additionally, prompt decomposition using an LLM takes
approximately 20 minutes. Additional detailed ablation studies on LLM, cost analysis are provided
in the supplementary material.
Limitations
A potential limitation of our method lies in its dependence on the decomposition of the
target prompt. Since the editing flows are derived from sub-prompts, the quality and characteristics
of the final output can vary depending on the choice of LLMs. Although SplitFlow incurs a higher
inference time than the baseline, we emphasize that the LLM serves only as a proxy to facilitate our
main contribution—demonstrating that decomposing the editing process into sub-target flows can
significantly improve image-editing performance—and proposing a principled method to aggregate
these flows effectively. By showing that flow decomposition substantially enhances both fidelity
and editability in image editing, this work also opens up new directions for future research. These
include developing more effective prompt decomposition techniques using LLMs or vision-language
models, as well as exploring optimization-based approaches to mitigate gradient conflicts during
flow composition. Additional discussions, including analyses of extreme cases, are provided in the
supplementary materials.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed SplitFlow, a flow decomposition and composition framework designed to
address gradient entanglement and semantic conflict that arise in image editing with complex and
multi-attribute target prompts. SplitFlow computes independent editing flows for each sub-target
prompt and forms a unified trajectory through projection and aggregation, thereby maintaining
semantic alignment while mitigating interference between attributes. To this end, we introduced two
aggregation strategies: Latent Trajectory Projection (LTP), which aligns the directional components
of the latent trajectory to ensure coherence with the global target semantics, and Velocity Field
Aggregation (VFA), which adaptively integrates sub-target flows while preserving their semantic
diversity. These components enable SplitFlow to effectively balance fidelity and editability—two
often conflicting objectives in image editing. Extensive experiments on the PIE-Bench benchmark
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms existing approaches in both visual quality
and prompt alignment. Our results confirm that decomposing the editing process into semantically
meaningful flows and carefully reassembling them provides a promising direction for accurate, and
high-quality text-guided image editing.
References
[1] Michael S. Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Building Normalizing Flows with Stochastic
Interpolants, March 2023. arXiv:2209.15571 [cs].
[2] Yusuf Dalva, Kavana Venkatesh, and Pinar Yanardag. Fluxspace: Disentangled semantic editing
in rectified flow models. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 13083–13092, 2025.
10

--- Page 11 ---
[3] Yingying Deng, Xiangyu He, Changwang Mei, Peisong Wang, and Fan Tang. FireFlow: Fast
Inversion of Rectified Flow for Image Semantic Editing, December 2024. arXiv:2412.07517
[cs].
[4] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini,
Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow trans-
formers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on machine
learning, 2024.
[5] Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
[6] Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
Prompt-to-Prompt Image Editing with Cross Attention Control, August 2022. arXiv:2208.01626
[cs].
[7] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[8] Vincent Tao Hu, David W. Zhang, Pascal Mettes, Meng Tang, Deli Zhao, and Cees G. M. Snoek.
Latent Space Editing in Transformer-Based Flow Matching, December 2023. arXiv:2312.10825
[cs].
[9] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023.
[10] Xuan Ju, Ailing Zeng, Yuxuan Bian, Shaoteng Liu, and Qiang Xu. Direct Inversion: Boosting
Diffusion-based Editing with 3 Lines of Code, October 2023. arXiv:2310.01506 [cs].
[11] Vladimir Kulikov, Matan Kleiner, Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, and Tomer Michaeli.
FlowEdit: Inversion-Free Text-Based Editing Using Pre-Trained Flow Models, December
2024. arXiv:2412.08629 [cs].
[12] Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-
concept customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1931–1941, 2023.
[13] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow
matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[14] Bo Liu, Xingchao Liu, Xiaojie Jin, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu. Conflict-averse gradient descent
for multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18878–18890,
2021.
[15] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, et al. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer
data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[16] Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text Inversion
for Editing Real Images using Guided Diffusion Models, November 2022. arXiv:2211.09794
[cs].
[17] Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Idan Achituve, Haggai Maron, Kenji Kawaguchi, Gal Chechik,
and Ethan Fetaya. Multi-task learning as a bargaining game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01017,
2022.
[18] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
11

--- Page 12 ---
[19] Litu Rout, Yujia Chen, Nataniel Ruiz, Constantine Caramanis, Sanjay Shakkottai, and Wen-
Sheng Chu. Semantic Image Inversion and Editing using Rectified Stochastic Differential
Equations, October 2024. arXiv:2410.10792 [cs].
[20] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine
learning, pages 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015.
[21] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[22] Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. 2023.
[23] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and
Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
[24] Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features
for text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1921–1930, 2023.
[25] Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, and Nikhil Naik. Edict: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled
transformations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 22532–22541, 2023.
[26] Jiangshan Wang, Junfu Pu, Zhongang Qi, Jiayi Guo, Yue Ma, Nisha Huang, Yuxin Chen, Xiu
Li, and Ying Shan. Taming Rectified Flow for Inversion and Editing.
[27] Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: From error
visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, page 600–612, Apr
2004.
[28] Chengdong Wu, Ling-Qiao Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo
Sapiro, and Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. Apr
2021.
[29] Pengcheng Xu, Boyuan Jiang, Xiaobin Hu, Donghao Luo, Qingdong He, Jiangning Zhang,
Chengjie Wang, Yunsheng Wu, Charles Ling, and Boyu Wang. Unveil Inversion and Invariance
in Flow Transformer for Versatile Image Editing, March 2025. arXiv:2411.15843 [cs].
[30] Sihan Xu, Yidong Huang, Jiayi Pan, Ziqiao Ma, and Joyce Chai. Inversion-Free Image Editing
with Natural Language, December 2023. arXiv:2312.04965 [cs].
[31] Xiaofeng Yang, Cheng Chen, Xulei Yang, Fayao Liu, and Guosheng Lin. Text-to-Image
Rectified Flow as Plug-and-Play Priors, February 2025. arXiv:2406.03293 [cs].
[32] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
33:5824–5836, 2020.
[33] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreason-
able effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Jun 2018.
12

--- Page 13 ---
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
1. Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
paper’s contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We not only propose a new method (SplitFlow), but also quantitatively show
that the proposed method is effective.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
made in the paper.
• The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
• The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
• It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
are not attained by the paper.
2. Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: In the last section (Sec. 6), we discuss the limitation of our work.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
• The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
implications would be.
• The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
• The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
technical jargon.
• The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
and how they scale with dataset size.
• If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
address problems of privacy and fairness.
• While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory assumptions and proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
a complete (and correct) proof?
Answer: [Yes]
13

--- Page 14 ---
Justification: We provide short theoretical proof in the main paper and more details in the
supplementary results.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
• All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
referenced.
• All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
• The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
proof sketch to provide intuition.
• Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We will release the code upon acceptance for reproducibility. Also, we provide
details about our method including algorithm table (in supple) and implementation details
(in Sec. 5).
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
whether the code and data are provided or not.
• If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
• Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
appropriate to the research performed.
• While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
nature of the contribution. For example
(a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
to reproduce that algorithm.
(b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
the architecture clearly and fully.
(c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
the dataset).
(d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
14

--- Page 15 ---
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
material?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification:
We provide open access to code (github:
https://github.com/
Harvard-AI-and-Robotics-Lab/SplitFlow.), with scripts to run the code.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
• Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
benchmark).
• The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
//nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
• The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
• At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
versions (if applicable).
• Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: In Sec. 5, we specify the dataset we used, and how the baselines are selected.
Also, the hyperparameter setting is included.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
• The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: All experiments were conducted with a fixed random seed, and statistical
significance testing is also provided in the supplementary material.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
the main claims of the paper.
15

--- Page 16 ---
• The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
run with given experimental conditions).
• The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
• It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
of the mean.
• It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
of Normality of errors is not verified.
• For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
error rates).
• If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments compute resources
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Additional details on the computational cost, including memory usage and
GPU specifications, are provided in the supplementary materials.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
• The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
• The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
didn’t make it into the paper).
9. Code of ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The work follows the NeurIPS Code of Ethics; no personal data, hateful, or
illicit content is used.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
• If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
deviation from the Code of Ethics.
• The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
societal impacts of the work performed?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: This work introduces a method for image editing using prompt decomposition
and flow-based generation. A potential positive societal impact is the enhanced accessibility
and creative control it offers to artists, designers, and accessibility tools through more
intuitive image manipulation. However, like other generative models, the proposed method
16

--- Page 17 ---
could be misused to produce manipulated or misleading media content. While the method
is intended for research and creative applications, its potential for misuse warrants careful
consideration. We will incorporate safeguards such as content provenance mechanisms and
watermarking strategies in future deployments.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
• If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
• Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
(e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
(e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
• The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
models that generate Deepfakes faster.
• The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
• If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: No pretrained model is released in this work. The model we use (Stable
Diffusion 3) is subject to a restrictive license that governs its usage and distribution. As such,
appropriate safeguards are already in place through the licensing terms of the underlying
model.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
• Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
• Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
• We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [Yes]
17

--- Page 18 ---
Justification: All external assets used in this paper, including pretrained models (Stable
diffusion 3), datasets (PIE-benchmark), and code repositories (github), are properly cited
with the original source and license information.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
• For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
• If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
• For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
• If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13. New assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: No new dataset or model checkpoint is released.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
• Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
• The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
• At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The research uses only publicly available images and no human-subject study.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
• According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
subjects
18

--- Page 19 ---
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: No human-subject data collection was performed.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
• We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology,
scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Large Language Models (LLMs) were used as an integral part of the method-
ology, specifically to decompose editing prompts into semantically meaningful intermediate
descriptions that guide the diffusion-based image editing process. The use of LLMs (e.g.,
Mistral-7B-Instruct) impacts the behavior and outcome of the proposed method.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
• Please refer to our LLM policy (https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
for what should or should not be described.
19