--- Page 1 ---
Understanding Data Influence in Reinforcement
Finetuning
Haoru Tan1
Xiuzhe Wu5†
Sitong Wu3
Shaofeng Zhang4
Yanfeng Chen2
Xingwu Sun2
Jeanne Shen5
Xiaojuan Qi1†
1The University of Hong Kong
2Hunyuan Team, Tencent
3The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4University of Science and Technology of China
5Stanford University
hrtan@eee.hku.hk, stone-wu@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) is essential for enhancing the reasoning and gen-
eralization capabilities of large language models, but its success heavily relies on
the quality of the training data. While data selection has been extensively studied in
supervised learning, its role in reinforcement learning, particularly during the RFT
stage, remains largely underexplored. In this work, we introduce RFT-Inf, the first
influence estimator designed for data in reinforcement learning. RFT-Inf quantifies
the importance of each training example by measuring how its removal affects the
final training reward, offering a direct estimate of its contribution to model learn-
ing. To ensure scalability, we propose a first-order approximation of the RFT-Inf
score by backtracking through the optimization process and applying temporal
differentiation to the sample-wise influence term, along with a first-order Taylor
approximation to adjacent time steps. This yields a lightweight, gradient-based
estimator that evaluates the alignment between an individual sample’s gradient and
the average gradient direction of all training samples, where a higher degree of
alignment implies greater training utility. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
RFT-Inf consistently improves reward performance and accelerates convergence in
reinforcement fine-tuning.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement Fine-Tuning (RFT) [1–4] has emerged as a powerful technique for refining the
capabilities of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 5, 3] by leveraging reward-driven optimization
[6, 7]. Unlike Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) [8–10], which guides model behavior through direct
supervision [11], RFT enables models to learn more robust reasoning strategies and generalize
beyond seen data [1, 11, 12]. Recent studies have confirmed the critical role of RFT in advancing
the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, particularly in complex tasks requiring multi-step inference and
decision-making.
Background. A fundamental aspect of successful RFT lies in the construction and utilization of
high-quality training data [1, 13, 14]. However, current understanding of data’s role in RFT remains
†Corresponding Authors
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

--- Page 2 ---
largely heuristic or empirical, often guided by reward trends observed during training [13, 15] or the
perceived difficulty of training examples [16, 17]. Despite its importance, there remains a lack of
principled, quantitative methods for assessing the impact of individual samples on RFT outcomes.
Addressing this gap is essential for designing more efficient and effective training pipelines.
Our Method. In this work, we propose RFT-Inf for quantifying the influence of the individual
training sample in reinforcement fine-tuning. The core idea behind RFT-Inf is to measure how
the removal of a single sample influences the final training reward, providing a direct estimate
of its contribution to the model’s learning process. While a brute-force approach would require
re-training the model after removing each sample, such computation is prohibitively expensive.
To address this, we introduce a scalable, first-order approximation of the RFT-Inf score derived
from backtracking through the optimization process and applying temporal differentiation to the
sample-wise influence term, along with a first-order Taylor approximation to adjacent time steps.
This results in a lightweight gradient-based estimator with linear complexities that measures the
alignment between a sample’s gradient and the average gradient direction of all training samples
across different training stages, see Eq.(5). A higher alignment corresponds to a higher RFT-Inf score,
indicating greater sample importance. Intuitively, if a sample’s gradient is closely aligned with the
overall optimization direction, it is more representative and beneficial to training. Removing such a
sample would degrade performance, highlighting its importance. We further provide a theoretical
worst-case error bound for our first-order approximation, offering insights into its reliability.
We validate RFT-Inf across multiple benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying
high-impact samples and improving final model performance. Using RFT-Inf for data selection
yields significant performance gains over baselines that rely on full datasets or heuristic selection
strategies. Notably, in mathematical reasoning tasks, we only require about 20% data selected by
our data influence estimator to achieve more stable training and superior results compared to using
the entire dataset. Compared to various heuristic or rule-based data selection methods, our approach
significantly outperforms them in both performance and generalization.
2
Related Work
Reinforcement Fine-Tuning.
Recent breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs) [2, 1, 3]
have been significantly driven by Reinforcement Fine-Tuning (RFT) [6, 7, 1, 18, 19], a technique
that refines LLM behavior using reward-guided optimization. Unlike Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
[8–10], which aligns model outputs with labeled responses [11], RFT employs reinforcement learning
to adapt models based on feedback signals. Typically, RFT relies on rule-based reward functions and
reinforcement learning algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [6]. For instance,
DeepSeek-R1 [1] adopts Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [7], using binary rewards to
indicate answer correctness in tasks like mathematics [20] and coding [21], achieving impressive
performance. Several studies suggest that RFT enhances cognitive abilities such as reflection and self-
correction [22, 1], while also improving generalization across tasks [11]. Much of the current RFT
research focuses on algorithmic improvements. For example, VinePPO [23] addresses limitations in
PPO’s value networks for complex reasoning tasks by introducing unbiased Monte Carlo estimates for
better credit assignment. Other works aim to simplify GRPO, e.g., by removing the KL-divergence
term to achieve more robust empirical results [18, 24].
Most recently, some emerging research explores data-centric approaches to improve RFT [13, 14,
18, 15]. For example, LIMR [13] selects samples by analyzing changes in reward trends, while the
Historical Variance Score [15] prioritizes data with high reward variability, suggesting that such
samples are more impactful. Other works incorporate sample difficulty as a selection criterion to strike
a balance between learning efficiency and model robustness [16, 17]. Despite these advances, existing
work on data selection for RFT is largely heuristic and lacks principled methods for quantifying
the influence of individual training samples. As a result, most methods rely on empirical intuition
rather than theoretical insight. This highlights an urgent need for data-centric frameworks that enable
quantitative analysis of sample importance during RFT, ultimately guiding more effective training.
Data Influence Analysis.
Analyzing the impact of individual training samples is a longstanding
problem in machine learning [25, 26]. The canonical approach involves removing a sample and
re-training the model to observe the effect—an idea that is precise but computationally prohibitive
[26–28]. To overcome this, many works propose theoretical estimators that approximate sample
2

--- Page 3 ---
influence without full retraining. A seminal method by Koh and Liang [26] estimates sample influence
using the inverse Hessian-gradient product, assuming the model parameters change smoothly under
small data perturbations. Building on this, subsequent work has improved the efficiency of Hessian
computations through decomposition techniques [29–32], incorporated group-level effects [33, 34],
or integrated influence estimation with training procedures [35, 36].
However, these approaches are predominantly designed for supervised learning and often depend
on key assumptions: a well-defined, twice-differentiable objective function, and convexity of the
loss landscape [26, 37, 38]. Such conditions facilitate tractable approximation but do not hold in
reinforcement learning, where the optimization objective is to maximize expected reward rather than
minimize a loss. Consequently, applying these influence functions directly to reinforcement learning
is challenging. Moreover, data influence research in supervised learning has been leveraged for tasks
such as data selection [26, 39–43] and attribution [29, 44–49], but similar progress in reinforcement
learning remains limited. This disconnect motivates the development of new, scalable influence
estimation tools tailored specifically for RFT scenarios.
3
Preliminaries
This section introduces the foundational concepts of reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) [2, 1, 14,
7, 50, 3] as applied to large language models (LLMs) [51, 52]. We consider a training dataset
Z = zi = (si, yi)N
i=1 composed of structured question–answer pairs, where each sample zi consists
of a prompt or question si and a corresponding deterministic ground-truth answer yi, e.g., a math
problem and its correct solution. Let πθ denote the policy model parameterized by θ, representing the
LLM. In this formulation, the input state s corresponds to the prompt, and the action a is the model’s
generated response. A scalar reward r measures the quality of the response a for the given prompt s.
The objective of RFT is to fine-tune the LLM using reinforcement learning to produce correct and
high-quality answers [6, 7]. A commonly adopted reward scheme directly compares the model output
with the ground truth [1], assigning a reward of r = 1 if the output matches the correct answer and
r = −1 otherwise.
Objective Function. The standard RFT objective is to optimize the policy πθ by maximizing the
expected advantage:
J (θ) = E(s,a)
h
A(s, a)
i
,
(1)
where the advantage function is defined as A(s, a) = r(s, a) −v, representing the relative merit
of taking action a in state s compared to a baseline value v. Optimization proceeds via stochastic
gradient ascent: θt+1 = θt + ηt∇θJ(θt), where ηt is the learning rate and the gradient of J (θ) is
derived as: ∇θJ (θ) = E(s,a)
h
A(s, a) · ∇θ log πθ(a|s)
i
.
Modern RFT implementations typically enhance this vanilla formulation to improve stability and
performance. We now briefly review two widely used variants: Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
[6] and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [7, 1], which serve as the foundation for many
current RFT advancements [18, 12, 50, 53].
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [6] introduces a clipping mechanism to stabilize training by
constraining policy updates. Its objective is formulated as:
J PPO(θ) = E(s,a)

min
 πθ(a|s)
πθold(a|s)A(s, a), clip
 πθ(a|s)
πθold(a|s), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

A(s, a)

,
(2)
where ϵ is a clipping hyperparameter. πθ(a|s) is the probability of taking action a in state s according
to the current policy with parameters θ, and πθold(a|s) is the probability of taking action a in state s
according to the old policy with parameters θold.
Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [7, 1] extends PPO by defining advantages through
relative comparisons within a group of sampled responses for the same prompt. For each prompt s, a
group of outputs a1, . . . , aG is sampled from the old policy πθold. The GRPO objective is:
J GRPO(θ) =
E(s,ai)
"
1
G
G
X
i=1
min
 πθ(ai|s)
πθold(ai|s)A(s, ai), clip
 πθ(ai|s)
πθold(ai|s), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

A(s, ai)

−βKL (πθ∥πref)
#
,
(3)
3

--- Page 4 ---
where ϵ is the clipping hyperparameter and β is the coefficient controlling the weight of the KL-
divergence regularization to ensure the optimized model does not deviate excessively from the
reference model (e.g., the initial policy model); and A(s, ai) = ri−mean(r1,...,rG)
std(r1,...,rG)
is the advantage,
where ri corresponds to the reward of each output. GRPO eliminates the need for a separate value
network, reducing computational cost and simplifying training. For more details, we refer readers to
the original GRPO papers [7, 1].
4
Method
In this section, we introduce our proposed method. We begin by defining the data influence estimator
and presenting a first-order approximation for efficient computation, along with a theoretical analysis
of the approximation error. We then describe how this score can be used to select high-impact samples
to improve the performance of RFT.
4.1
Data Influence in Reinforcement Finetuning
We propose a principled approach to assess the importance of each training sample by measuring
its influence on the final performance of reinforcement fine-tuning through evaluating how model
performance changes when the sample is removed from training.
Definition.
Let Z denote the training dataset consisting of samples z = (s, y), where s is a prompt
and y is its deterministic answer (e.g., a math problem and its unique solution). Let Z/z denote the
dataset excluding sample z, and let θ∗
Z and θ∗
Z/z denote the parameters obtained by training on Z and
Z/z, respectively. Assuming a reward function that assigns r = 1 if the model output matches the
ground truth and r = −1 otherwise [1, 14], we define the data influence estimator of a sample z as:
D(z) = J

θ∗
Z

−J

θ∗
Z/z

,
(4)
where J (·) denotes the expected reward. This score is directional; it not only quantifies the importance
of a sample but also distinguishes whether the sample is beneficial or detrimental to training. A
large positive value of D(z) indicates that removing the sample significantly reduces the final reward,
suggesting that the sample is beneficial. Conversely, a negative value implies that the sample is
harmful, as removing it would increase the reward. Values near zero indicate negligible influence.
Thus, this metric provides a direct and interpretable measure of each sample’s contribution to RFT.
Efficient First-order Approximation.
Precisely Direct computation of D(z) is impractical, as
it requires retraining the model for each sample. To address this issue, we introduce a first-order
approximation of the RFT-Inf score by backtracking the score defined in Eq. (4) through the
optimization process. We apply temporal differentiation and a first-order Taylor approximation to
adjacent time steps. The detailed derivation is provided in the supplementary material. Below is the
approximation with linear complexities:
ˆD(z) =
X
t
2ηt
N
D
G(t)
z , G(t)
Z
E
,
(5)
where
D
:, :
E
is the inner-product operator, Z/z represents the dataset Z excluding sample z : (s, y),
and ηt is the learning rate at time step t. T and N denote the maximum number of time steps and the
training set size, respectively. G(t)
z
represents the policy gradient contributed by sample z : (s, y) at
time step t. Typically, for most RL algorithms, we have G(t)
z
= ˆA(s, a)∇log πθt(a|s), where ˆA(s, a)
is the advantage function. In the case of GRPO [7], G(t)
z
= PG
i
ˆA(s, ai)∇log πθt(ai|s), where G
is the group size. The other gradient term G(t)
Z is defined as the gradient over all samples, that is,
G(t)
Z = P
z∈Z G(t)
z .
This approximation evaluates the alignment between a sample’s gradient and the overall training
direction. A higher value indicates that the sample’s influence aligns with the global training trajectory,
marking it as representative and valuable. This can be interpreted as follows: if the sample’s gradient
G(t)
z
exhibits a high degree of alignment with the average gradient vector G(t)
Z for all time steps, then
4

--- Page 5 ---
Algorithm 1: Data Selection Pipeline
Require: A dataset Z = {(si, yi)}N
i=1 and selection budget δ; A large language model πθ and a
reinforcement fine-tuning algorithm RFT
1: Train the model πθ for E epochs on Z using RFT and save checkpoints:
{θ1, . . . , θE} ←RFT(πθ, Z, E)
2: for each sample zi = (si, yi) ∈Z do
3:
Calculate the data influence estimator ˆD(zi) according to Eq. (5)
4: end for
5: Select the top-δ samples based on their data influence estimators to form the new subset Znew
6: return The subset model Znew
optimizing the network using sample z will have a similar effect optimizing with the full training set.
This indicates that the sample z is a representative and important sample. Therefore, this sample is
regarded as a more representative and significant one.
4.2
Error Analysis
First, we provide a worst-case error bound for the proposed approximation, demonstrating its
robustness under some mild assumptions:
Proposition 1.
Under the assumptions that the log-likelihood function log πθ(a|s) exhibits ℓ-
Lipschitz continuity and that the adventure value is upper-bounded by Amax, the approximation error
of Eq. (5) is bounded as follows:
D(z) −ˆD(z)
 ≤O
hηmax(4N + 4)
N
(ℓAmax)2 + 2ηℓ2Amax
i
T

,
(6)
where T denotes the maximum number of iterations and N is the number of all training data.
The above proposition formalizes the relationship between the approximation error and influencing
factors, particularly the training duration T. To mitigate errors in practice, we adopt a strategy of
early stopping during the surrogate training phase, avoiding full convergence. Specifically, we limit
the number of update epochs to a small value (e.g., two epochs) to ensure the effective execution of
surrogate training while also controlling the theoretical maximum error. Remarkably, the resulting
error bound remains tighter than many known bounds for influence functions in supervised learning
[41, 54], despite the added challenges posed by the reinforcement learning setting.
4.3
Complexity Analysis
Then, we discuss the computational complexity of our estimator. Eq. (5) offers an efficient approx-
imation of the data influence estimator with linear computational complexity. Further, rather than
summing over all training steps, we adopt a Monte Carlo sampling strategy [55, 56], selecting a
small number of evenly spaced time steps to estimate the full summation since checkpoints from
nearby iterations will be similar. Let the number of selected checkpoints be C. By employing this
strategy, the total computational complexity for scoring the entire dataset is O

NE + NC

, where
NE is the cost of surrogate training, and N represents the number of training samples and C denotes
the number of checkpoints (which also corresponds to the number of sampled checkpoints, as we
select one checkpoint for each epoch). This represents a substantial efficiency gain over the naive
approach, which requires retraining the model for each sample and incurs a cost of O

(N −1)E

per sample, resulting in O

N(N −1)E

overall. Leveraging practical implementations such as
PyTorch’s efficient gradient operations [57], or computing only final-layer gradients [55, 58], further
enhances scalability.
4.4
Implementation Details
We now describe how to use the proposed data influence estimator to identify and select high-impact
samples for reinforcement fine-tuning. The full pipeline is outlined in Algorithm 1. We are given a
5

--- Page 6 ---
structured dataset Z = {zi = (si, yi)}N
i=1 consisting of question–answer pairs, where each sample zi
comprises a prompt or question si and a corresponding deterministic answer yi. We are also provided
with a pre-trained large language model, serving as the policy model πθ, and a reward evaluation
mechanism. A common and effective approach to reward calculation involves directly comparing the
generated answer to the ground truth y; for instance, a reward of r = 1 is assigned if the generated
answer matches the ground truth, and r = −1 otherwise.
As shown in Algorithm 1: the policy model first undergoes a small number of reinforcement fine-
tuning (RFT) epochs, namely E epochs, on the full training dataset. We refer to this training phase
as surrogate training. The choice of reinforcement learning algorithm is flexible; for instance, one
may use PPO [6], GRPO [7], or any other compatible method. At the end of each epoch, a model
checkpoint is saved for later use. To reduce training costs, several practical strategies can be employed.
These include setting a small number of epochs (e.g., E = 2), or applying parameter-efficient fine-
tuning techniques such as LoRA [59] instead of full model fine-tuning, as recommended by recent
studies [60, 31]. These techniques have been empirically shown to significantly reduce computational
overhead without negatively impacting performance. After surrogate training, the saved checkpoints
are used to compute per-sample gradients as well as the overall gradient across the dataset. The data
influence estimator for each sample is then computed according to Eq. (5). Using the computed data
influence estimators, we perform data selection based on a predefined budget δ, which specifies the
size of the target subset. The top-δ samples with the highest data influence estimators are selected
to form a refined training set, denoted as Znew. This curated subset is then used for the formal
reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) phase to obtain the final model parameters π∗
θ.
5
Experiments
We conducted comprehensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method.
Sec. 5.1 is the main experiment. Then, Sec. 5.2 provides detailed ablation studies to analyze the
impact of key components in our approach.
5.1
Main Experiments
Figure 1: The reward and accuracy curve during learning on the
subset selected by RFT-Inf (20% selection ratio). This experiment
is conducted on DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B, and the selected
benchmark is AIME24 [20].
Models,
Datasets,
and
Benchmarks.
We utilized
the
dataset
released
by
DeepScaleR [14], which is a
comprehensive mathematical
dataset compiled from mul-
tiple sources, with duplicates
removed and data cleaned.
This dataset includes AIME
problems from 1984 to 2023
and AMC problems before
2023, along with questions
from the Omni-MATH [61]
and STILL [62] datasets, fea-
turing problems from various
national and international
mathematics
competitions.
This training dataset contains approximately 40,000 math problem-answer pairs. To evaluate the
reasoning abilities of the models, we utilize five different mathematics benchmarks: AIME24
[20], MATH-500 [63], AMC23 [64], Minerva [65], and OlympiadBench [66]. Our experiments
encompass a variety of model configurations, including DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B [1],
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B [1], and Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct [67]. Unless otherwise specified, the
default algorithm used is GRPO, with a group size set to 8.
Setups. The experiments were conducted using the PyTorch framework on two high-performance
computing servers, each equipped with eight NVIDIA H200 GPUs. For our approach, we made the
following settings: during the surrogate training phase, we performed LoRA training with a LoRA
6

--- Page 7 ---
Selection Ratio
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-1.5B on AIME24
Selection Ratio
60
70
80
90
100
110
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-1.5B on MATH-500
Selection Ratio
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-1.5B on AMC23
Selection Ratio
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-1.5B on Olympiad
10
20
40
60
80
Selection Ratio
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-7B on AIME24
10
20
40
60
80
Selection Ratio
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-7B on MATH-500
10
20
40
60
80
Selection Ratio
60
70
80
90
100
110
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-7B on AMC23
10
20
40
60
80
Selection Ratio
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Pass@1 (%)
Qwen-7B on Olympiad
Random
Difficulty
LIMR
HVS
Ours
Figure 2: This figure presents the zero-shot pass@1 performance (%) of our proposed data selection
method ("Ours") against several baselines (Random, Difficulty-based, LIMR, HVS) across four
mathematical reasoning benchmarks (AIME24, MATH-500, AMC23, Olympiad) and two model
sizes: Qwen-1.5B (DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B) and Qwen-7B (DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-
7B). The performance is plotted as a function of the data Selection Ratio (from 10% to 80%),
representing the budget constraint.
rank set to 16 and a total of 2 training epochs. We optimized the network using the AdamW optimizer
with a constant learning rate of 1 × e−6 and a weight decay of 0.1.
Baselines. We compare our method against several widely used baselines: (1) Random selection,
where a subset of data is chosen uniformly at random. (2) Difficulty-driven selection, where the
difficulty of each sample is estimated based on model performance. Specifically, we run inference
for each sample with multiple models (DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B/7B/32B [1]), and use the
average pass rate as a proxy for difficulty [17]. Based on this, we select those samples with median
difficulty [68]. (3) LIMR [13], which determines sample importance by measuring the alignment
between a sample’s reward and the overall reward trend during training. (4) Historical Variance Score
(HSV) [15], which quantifies sample importance by computing the variance in its reward values over
the course of training.
To evaluate our method, we selected two models: DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B [1] and DeepSeek-
R1-Distill-Qwen-7B [1]. Here, the model we use for scoring is consistent with the final trained
model. Both models are derived from the Qwen series and have been distilled using DeepSeek-R1,
demonstrating a solid foundational reasoning ability. We summarize the relevant experimental results
in Fig. 2. Clearly, our method outperforms various baseline approaches under the most constrained
budgets, particularly at very low selection ratios. Specifically, at the 20% selection ratio setting:
for the 1.5B model type, our method achieves an accuracy of 45.5% in AIME24, outperforming
all baseline methods, including LIMR [13] and HVS [15]. On MATH-500, our score of 89.0% is
notably higher than the best baseline score of 86.2% from Full Data. In the case of the 20% selection
ratio and the 7B model, our method further excels, achieving a score of 60.2% on AIME24, which is
significantly higher than the next best baseline score of 57.3% from HVS [15].
5.2
Further study
In this subsection, we explore several key factors, including the number of checkpoints and the
training method (either LoRA rank or full-parameter training), also along with the case study.
Number of Checkpoints. We employed a Monte Carlo strategy when approximating the estimator
in Eq. (5), considering checkpoints from only a few time steps. In practice, we observed that as the
7

--- Page 8 ---
2
3
4
5
6
Number of Checkpoints
43.0
43.5
44.0
44.5
45.0
45.5
46.0
46.5
47.0
47.5
Pass@1 Accuracy (%)
45.5
45.8
46.1
46.0
46.2
4
8
16
64
Full-Param
LoRA Rank (Log Scale)
43.5
44.0
44.5
45.0
45.5
46.0
46.5
47.0
Pass@1 Accuracy (%)
44.3
45.2
45.5
45.4
45.9
Figure 3: Ablative experimental results with DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B as the model and
AIME24 as the benchmark. The performance metric is zero-shot Pass@1 Accuracy. (a) Pass@1
accuracy versus the number of checkpoints used, showing that increasing checkpoints stabilizes
the training (decreasing standard deviation). (b) Pass@1 accuracy versus LoRA rank (log scale),
demonstrating that performance generally improves with higher LoRA ranks, approaching the Full-
Parameter result.
number of checkpoints increased, the final performance improved, see Fig. 3. This is understandable,
as it effectively increases the sampling steps, thereby enhancing approximation accuracy. However,
this also results in a significant decrease in scoring speed, and the improvement shows a trend of
stagnation. Therefore, we opted for a relatively small number of checkpoints, specifically two, with
each corresponding to one epoch.
LoRA-Rank. Our method requires training a surrogate model before scoring, using LoRA training
with a rank of 16. LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) is a technique that efficiently fine-tunes large
language models by incorporating low-rank decomposition into the weight updates, enabling ef-
fective adaptation with fewer parameters and reduced computational cost. This means that when
approximating the estimator in Eq.(5), we do not utilize all model parameters. We tested the impact
of using LoRA training and the size of the LoRA rank on final performance, see the results in
Fig. 3. In conclusion, we found that using LoRA significantly improves efficiency compared to
full-parameter training, without negatively impacting the performance of the data selected based on
the final data influence estimator. Additionally, we discovered that even with a LoRA rank of 4, the
final performance remains quite satisfactory.
Case study.
In the following, we provide an illustrative examination of several cases, showing
their assigned RFT-Inf scores and the resulting importance rankings (in descending order). For
benchmarking, we include the data importance rankings generated by the alternative HVS [15]
strategy. To establish an objective metric for task complexity, we use the pass rate, measured by
the number of correct outputs from eight QwQ-32B [5] samples. Lower pass-rates correlate with
higher question difficulty. Our analysis reveals a crucial distinction in data valuation: A high degree
of concordance is found between RFT-Inf and HVS rankings for data points associated with extreme
difficulty levels. For example, in both Case 1 and Case 4, which represent the spectrum’s edges, both
methods assign significantly low importance ranks, implying a general agreement that the marginal
utility of such data is negligible. Crucially, the two ranking strategies exhibit substantial disparity
when evaluating data points of intermediate or moderate difficulty. This disagreement in identifying
the most valuable samples within the ’middle ground’ of difficulty constitutes the fundamental driver
behind the varying empirical performance observed in different data selection paradigms.
Case 1
Problem: Each vertex of a regular octagon is independently colored either red or blue with
equal probability. The probability that the octagon can then be rotated so that all of the blue
vertices end up at positions where there were originally red vertices is m
n , where m and n are
relatively prime positive integers. What is m + n?
Pass-rate-by-QwQ [5]: 0/8;
Rank-by-RFT-DA: 40245;
Rank-by-HVS [15]: 39076.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Case 2
Problem: Among the 900 residents of Aimeville, there are 195 who own a diamond ring, 367
who own a set of golf clubs, and 562 who own a garden spade. In addition, each of the 900
residents owns a bag of candy hearts. There are 437 residents who own exactly two of these
things, and 234 residents who own exactly three of these things. Find the number of residents
of Aimeville who own all four of these things.
Pass-rate-by-QwQ [5]: 5/8;
Rank-by-RFT-DA: 3205;
Rank-by-HVS [15]: 27855.
Case 3
Problem: Let ABC be a triangle inscribed in circle ω. Let the tangents to ω at B and C
intersect at point D, and let AD intersect ω at P. If AB = 5, BC = 9, and AC = 10, AP
can be written as the form m
n , where m and n are relatively prime integers. Find m + n.
Pass-rate-by-QwQ [5]: 4/8;
Rank-by-RFT-DA: 1129;
Rank-by-HVS [15]: 30724.
Case 4
Problem: Jen enters a lottery by picking 4 distinct numbers from S = {1, 2, 3, · · · , 9, 10}. 4
numbers are randomly chosen from S. She wins a prize if at least two of her numbers were 2
of the randomly chosen numbers, and wins the grand prize if all four of her numbers were the
randomly chosen numbers. The probability of her winning the grand prize given that she won
a prize is m
n where m and n are relatively prime positive integers. Find m + n.
Pass-rate-by-QwQ [5]: 8/8;
Rank-by-RFT-DA: 39275;
Rank-by-HVS [15]: 40236.
6
Conclusion
In this study, we present RFT-Inf, a novel approach for data selection in reinforcement fine-tuning,
aimed at finding those beneficial training examples while eliminating noisy or harmful ones. Central
to RFT-Inf is a sample-level influence analysis that assesses the significance of each training example
by evaluating how its exclusion impacts the final training reward, providing a clear indication of
its contribution to model learning. To enhance scalability, we introduce a lightweight, gradient-
based estimator with theoretical guarantees. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that RFT-Inf
consistently improves reward performance and accelerates convergence in reinforcement fine-tuning.
Limitations. While our method demonstrates strong performance across benchmarks, the experi-
mental scale validated in this paper is still limited. In real-world scenarios, both the data and model
sizes are significantly larger. In the future, we plan to secure additional computational resources to
validate performance on a larger experimental scale.
7
Acknowledge
This work has been supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No.
2022YFB3608300), Hong Kong Research Grant Council - Early Career Scheme (Grant No.
27209621), General Research Fund Scheme (Grant No. 17202422, 17212923, 17215025), The-
mebased Research (Grant No. T45-701/22-R), and Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation
Commission (SGDX20220530111405040). Part of the described research work is conducted in the
JC STEM Lab of Robotics for Soft Materials funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust.
9

--- Page 10 ---
References
[1] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong
Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[2] OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms, 2024.
[3] Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li, Chenjun Xiao,
Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, et al. Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement learning with llms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.12599, 2025.
[4] Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, Qi Han, Daxin Jiang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Open-
reasoner-zero: An open source approach to scaling up reinforcement learning on the base model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.24290, 2025.
[5] Qwen Team. Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learning, 2025.
[6] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[7] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[8] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time scaling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19393, 2025.
[9] Yingqian Min, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Jie Chen, Jia Deng, Yiwen Hu, Yiru Tang, Jiapeng Wang,
Xiaoxue Cheng, Huatong Song, et al. Imitate, explore, and self-improve: A reproduction report on
slow-thinking reasoning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09413, 2024.
[10] Yixin Ye, Zhen Huang, Yang Xiao, Ethan Chern, Shijie Xia, and Pengfei Liu. Limo: Less is more for
reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03387, 2025.
[11] Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Jihan Yang, Shengbang Tong, Saining Xie, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le,
Sergey Levine, and Yi Ma. Sft memorizes, rl generalizes: A comparative study of foundation model
post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17161, 2025.
[12] Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin.
Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783, 2025.
[13] Xuefeng Li, Haoyang Zou, and Pengfei Liu.
Limr: Less is more for rl scaling.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11886, 2025.
[14] Michael Luo, Sijun Tan, Justin Wong, Xiaoxiang Shi, William Y. Tang, Manan Roongta, Colin Cai, Jeffrey
Luo, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. Deepscaler: Surpassing o1-preview with a 1.5b model
by scaling rl. https://pretty-radio-b75.notion.site/DeepScaleR-Surpassing-O1-Preview-with-a-1-5B-Model-
by-Scaling-RL-19681902c1468005bed8ca303013a4e2, 2025. Notion Blog.
[15] Yiping Wang, Qing Yang, Zhiyuan Zeng, Liliang Ren, Lucas Liu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Xuehai
He, Kuan Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, Shuohang Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Yelong Shen.
Reinforcement learning for reasoning in large language models with one training example. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.20571, 2025.
[16] Weihao Zeng, Yuzhen Huang, Qian Liu, Wei Liu, Keqing He, Zejun Ma, and Junxian He. Simplerl-zoo:
Investigating and taming zero reinforcement learning for open base models in the wild. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.18892, 2025.
[17] Yunjie Ji, Sitong Zhao, Xiaoyu Tian, Haotian Wang, Shuaiting Chen, Yiping Peng, Han Zhao, and
Xiangang Li. How difficulty-aware staged reinforcement learning enhances llms’ reasoning capabilities: A
preliminary experimental study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00829, 2025.
[18] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu,
Lingjun Liu, Xin Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
[19] Jian Hu. Reinforce++: A simple and efficient approach for aligning large language models, 2025.
10

--- Page 11 ---
[20] AIME. American invitational mathematics examination. https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php/AIME-
Problems-and-Solutions, 2024.
[21] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-
Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large
language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024.
[22] Kanishk Gandhi, Ayush Chakravarthy, Anikait Singh, Nathan Lile, and Noah D Goodman. Cognitive
behaviors that enable self-improving reasoners, or, four habits of highly effective stars. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.01307, 2025.
[23] Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Milad Aghajohari, Eva Portelance, Alessandro Sordoni, Siva Reddy, Aaron
Courville, and Nicolas Le Roux. Vineppo: Unlocking rl potential for llm reasoning through refined credit
assignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01679, 2024.
[24] Xiangxiang Chu, Hailang Huang, Xiao Zhang, Fei Wei, and Yong Wang. Gpg: A simple and strong
reinforcement learning baseline for model reasoning, 2025.
[25] R Dennis Cook. Assessment of local influence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical
Methodology, 48(2):133–155, 1986.
[26] Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang.
Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
[27] Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[28] Vitaly Feldman and Zhang Chiyuan. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the long tail
via influence estimation. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2020.
[29] Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit Steiner,
Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization with influence
functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.
[30] Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence functions. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
[31] Yongchan Kwon, Eric Wu, Kevin Wu, and James Zou. Datainf: Efficiently estimating data influence in
lora-tuned llms and diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00902, 2023.
[32] Yegor Klochkov and Yang Liu. Revisiting inverse hessian vector products for calculating influence
functions, 2024.
[33] Pang Koh, Kai-Siang Ang, Hubert H. K. Teo, and Percy Liang. On the accuracy of influence functions for
measuring group effects. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
[34] Samyadeep Basu, Xuchen You, and Soheil Feizi. On second-order group influence functions for black-box
predictions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
[35] SungYub Kim, Kyungsu Kim, and Eunho Yang. Gex: A flexible method for approximating influence via
geometric ensemble. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[36] Myeongseob Ko, Feiyang Kang, Weiyan Shi, Ming Jin, Zhou Yu, and Ruoxi Jia. The mirrored influence
hypothesis: Efficient data influence estimation by harnessing forward passes. In CVPR, 2024.
[37] Anna Choromanska, Mikael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, Gerard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun. The loss
surfaces of multilayer networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 38:192–204, 2015.
[38] Yann N Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua Bengio.
Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex optimization. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2933–2941, 2014.
[39] Ruoxi Jia, Fan Wu, Xuehui Sun, Jiacen Xu, David Dao, Bhavya Kailkhura, Ce Zhang, Bo Li, and Dawn
Song. Scalability vs. utility: Do we have to sacrifice one for the other in data importance quantification?
In IEEE / CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2021.
[40] Siyi Tang, Amirata Ghorbani, Rikiya Yamashita, Sameer Rehman, Jared Dunnmon, James Zou, and
Daniel L. Rubin. Data valuation for medical imaging using shapley value and application to a large-scale
chest x-ray dataset. Science Report, 11:8366, 2021.
11

--- Page 12 ---
[41] Satoshi Hara, Atsushi Nitanda, and Takanori Maehara. Data cleansing for models trained with sgd.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[42] Anshuman Chhabra, Bo Li, Jian Chen, Prasant Mohapatra, and Hongfu Liu. Outlier gradient analysis:
Efficiently identifying detrimental training samples for deep learning models, 2024.
[43] Zhuoming Liu, Hao Ding, Huaping Zhong, Weijia Li, Jifeng Dai, and Conghui He. Influence selection for
active learning. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
[44] Hugh Chen, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Explaining a series of models by propagating shapley
values. Nature communications, 13(1):4512, 2022.
[45] Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Trak:
Attributing model behavior at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14186, 2023.
[46] Zheng Dai and David K Gifford.
Training data attribution for diffusion models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.02174, 2023.
[47] Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Datamodels:
Predicting predictions from training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00622, 2022.
[48] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Fei Du, Yukang Chen, Zhibin Wang, Fan Wang, and Xiaojuan Qi. Data pruning via
moving-one-sample-out. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2023.
[49] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Xiuzhe Wu, Wang Wang, Bo Zhao, Zeke Xie, Gui-Song Xia, and Xiaojuan Qi.
Understanding data influence with differential approximation, 2025.
[50] Yufeng Yuan, Qiying Yu, Xiaochen Zuo, Ruofei Zhu, Wenyuan Xu, Jiaze Chen, et al. Vapo: Efficient and
reliable reinforcement learning for advanced reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05118, 2025.
[51] AI@Meta Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
[52] Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024.
[53] Xiaojiang Zhang, Jinghui Wang, Zifei Cheng, Wenhao Zhuang, Zheng Lin, Minglei Zhang, Shaojie Wang,
Yinghan Cui, Chao Wang, Junyi Peng, Shimiao Jiang, Shiqi Kuang, Shouyu Yin, Chaohang Wen, Haotian
Zhang, Bin Chen, and Bing Yu. Srpo: A cross-domain implementation of large-scale reinforcement
learning on llm, 2025.
[54] Jiachen T Wang, Dawn Song, James Zou, Prateek Mittal, and Ruoxi Jia. Capturing the temporal dependence
of training data influence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09538, 2024.
[55] Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Sundararajan Mukund, and Satyen Kale. Estimating training data influence
by tracing gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08484, 2020.
[56] Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning. In
International conference on machine learning, pages 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
[57] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, G Chanan, E Yang, Zachary Devito, Zeming Lin, Alban
Desmaison, L Antiga, A Lerer, and et.al. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In Advances in neural
information processing systems Workshop, 2017.
[58] Shuo Yang, Zeke Xie, Hanyu Peng, Min Xu, Mingming Sun, and Ping Li. Dataset pruning: Reducing train-
ing data by examining generalization influence. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[59] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022.
[60] Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. Less: Selecting
influential data for targeted instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04333, 2024.
[61] Bofei Gao, Feifan Song, Zhe Yang, Zefan Cai, Yibo Miao, Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Chenghao Ma, Liang
Chen, Runxin Xu, et al. Omni-math: A universal olympiad level mathematic benchmark for large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07985, 2024.
[62] Jinhao Jiang, Zhipeng Chen, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Xiaoxue Cheng, Jiapeng Wang, Yiru Tang, Haoxiang
Sun, Jia Deng, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zheng Liu, Dong Yan, Jian Xie, Zhongyuan Wang, and Ji-Rong Wen.
Enhancing llm reasoning with reward-guided tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11694, 2024.
12

--- Page 13 ---
[63] HuggingFaceH4 Team. Math-500: A subset of the math dataset. https://huggingface.co/datasets/
HuggingFaceH4/MATH-500, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-15.
[64] Qwen Team. Amc23 benchmark dataset. https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen2.5-Math, 2024. Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-15.
[65] David Lewkowycz, Ethan Dyer, Guy Gur-Ari, Igor Babuschkin, Jeffrey Wu, Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan,
et al. Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858,
2022.
[66] Yeyu Feng, Yiyang Gu, Ziyang Liu, Jiayi Wang, Qihao Zhu, et al. Olympiadbench: A challenging
benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.14008, 2024.
[67] Meta AI. Llama 3.2 3b instruct. https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct,
2024. Accessed: 2025-05-15.
[68] Xiaobo Xia, Jiale Liu, Jun Yu, Xu Shen, Bo Han, and Tongliang Liu. Moderate coreset: A universal method
of data selection for real-world data-efficient deep learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[69] Haoru Tan, Chuang Wang, Sitong Wu, Tieqiang Wang, Xu-Yao Zhang, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Proxy graph
matching with proximal matching networks. In The Annual AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), 2021.
[70] Barak A. Pearlmutter. Fast exact multiplication by the hessian. Neural Computation, 6(1):147–160, 1994.
[71] Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes, Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svetlana
Lazebnik. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-to-sentence
models. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 2641–2649, 2015.
[72] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
[73] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, and Jimin Pi. Semantic diffusion network for semantic segmentation. In Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[74] Bo Adler, Niket Agarwal, Ashwath Aithal, Dong H Anh, Pallab Bhattacharya, Annika Brundyn, Jared
Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Sharon Clay, Jonathan Cohen, et al. Nemotron-4 340b technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.11704, 2024.
[75] Sitong Wu, Haoru Tan, Yukang Chen, Shaofeng Zhang, Jingyao Li, Bei Yu, Xiaojuan Qi, and Jiaya
Jia. Mixture-of-scores: Robust image-text data quality score via three lines of code. In International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2025.
[76] Haoru Tan, Sitong Wu, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Xiaojuan Qi, and Jiaya Jia. Saco loss: Sample-wise
affinity consistency for vision-language pre-training. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[77] Qwen Team. Qwq: Reflect deeply on the boundaries of the unknown, 2024.
[78] Sitong Wu, Tianyi Wu, Haoru Tan, and Guodong Guo. Pale transformer: A general vision transformer
backbone with pale-shaped attention. In The Annual AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
2022.
[79] Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A coreset approach.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[80] Peizhao Li and Hongfu Liu. Achieving fairness at no utility cost via data reweighing with influence, 2022.
[81] Haoru Tan, Chuang Wang, Sitong Wu, Xu-Yao Zhang, Fei Yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Ensemble quadratic
assignment network for graph matching. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2024.
[82] Cody Coleman, Christopher Yeh, Stephen Mussmann, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Peter Bailis, Percy Liang,
Jure Leskovec, and Matei Zaharia. Selection via proxy: Efficient data selection for deep learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[83] Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
[84] Samyadeep Basu, Phillip Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[85] Zayd Hammoudeh and Daniel Lowd. Training data influence analysis and estimation: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.04612, 2022.
14

--- Page 15 ---
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
1. Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
paper’s contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the abstract and introduction section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
made in the paper.
• The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
• The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
• It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
are not attained by the paper.
2. Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the relevant section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
• The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
implications would be.
• The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
• The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
technical jargon.
• The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
and how they scale with dataset size.
• If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
address problems of privacy and fairness.
• While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory assumptions and proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
a complete (and correct) proof?
Answer: [Yes]
15

--- Page 16 ---
Justification: Please see the supplemental material.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
• All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
referenced.
• All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
• The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
proof sketch to provide intuition.
• Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the experimental section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
whether the code and data are provided or not.
• If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
• Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
appropriate to the research performed.
• While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
nature of the contribution. For example
(a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
to reproduce that algorithm.
(b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
the architecture clearly and fully.
(c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
the dataset).
(d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
material?
16

--- Page 17 ---
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The code and data will be made publicly available upon acceptance through
peer review.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
• Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
benchmark).
• The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
//nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
• The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
• At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
versions (if applicable).
• Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the experimental section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
• The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the experimental section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
the main claims of the paper.
• The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
run with given experimental conditions).
• The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
17

--- Page 18 ---
• It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
of the mean.
• It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
of Normality of errors is not verified.
• For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
error rates).
• If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments compute resources
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please see the experimental section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
• The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
• The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
didn’t make it into the paper).
9. Code of ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We strictly follow the relevant Guidelines.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
• If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
deviation from the Code of Ethics.
• The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
societal impacts of the work performed?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Please check the relevant section.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
• If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
• Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
(e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
(e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
18

--- Page 19 ---
• The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
models that generate Deepfakes faster.
• The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
• If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The training algorithm involved in this article will not cause the originally safe
model to become dangerous.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
• Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
• Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
• We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: This paper does not use existing assets
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
• For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
• If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
• For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
19

--- Page 20 ---
• If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13. New assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not release new assets
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
• Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
• The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
• At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
• According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
subjects
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
• We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
20

--- Page 21 ---
Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology,
scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
Answer: [NA]
Justification: This article only uses LLM to help check for spelling mistakes in very small
quantities.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
• Please refer to our LLM policy (https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
for what should or should not be described.
21

--- Page 22 ---
A
Impact Statement
This paper introduces a novel influence analysis algorithm to advance RFT training. It has potential
positive societal effects, such as improving understanding of data roles in developing robust systems
and possibly reducing data bias. However, there are concerns that the negative impacts could
be misused for inhumane social surveillance, which legislative bodies worldwide should address
seriously.
B
Mathematical Proof: Approximation
Let θt denote the learned parameter at the t−th iteration on the full dataset and θt
−z denote the learned
parameter at the t−th iteration on the dataset without sample z, we use Dt(z) to denote the empirical
expected reward at the t-th step,
Dt(z) = J (θt) −J (θt
−z),
where t ≤T, and D(z) = DT (z). Note that the network on the full set and that on the subset Z/z
started from the same initialization, hence, M0(z) = 0. Let’s start with the identical equation below,
D(z) =

D(z) −DT −1(z)

+

DT −1(z) −DT −2(z)

+ ... +

D1(z) −D0(z)

+ D0(z)
=

D(z) −DT −1(z)

+

DT −1(z) −DT −2(z)

+ ... +

D1(z) −D0(z)

= ∆DT + ∆DT −1 + ... + ∆D1.
(7)
Let’s take one single item ∆Dt as an example,
∆Dt = Dt(z) −Dt−1(z) =
h
J (θt) −J (θt−1)
i
−
h
J (θt
−z) −J (θt−1
−z )
i
(8)
By using the first-order Taylor approximation and according to the gradient-ascent algorithm in RFT,
we have that,
J (θt) −J (θt−1) ≈∇J (θt−1)

θt −θt−1
= ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2,
where the policy gradient ∇J (θt−1) = E(s,a)(A(a, s)∇log πθt(a|s)). Hence, we have the equation
for the differential term ∆Dt, that is,
∆Dt = ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2.
Given a specific sample z, we present a unified empirical expected reward formulation for RFT:
Jϵ = 1
N
X
s̸=z
A(as, s) + ( 1
N + ϵ) · A(az, z),
where ϵ is a coefficient. Hence, we have the expected reward on the full training set by setting ϵ = 0
and the subset without sample z by (approximately) setting ϵ = −1
N , which is a convention in influence
analysis for supervised learning [26, 33, 34, 31, 41, 58, 29, 46]. We can treat the ( 1
N + ϵ) · A(a, z)
as the new reward for sample z. Hence, the policy gradient given Jϵ is:
∇Jϵ = 1
N
X
s̸=z
A(as, s)∇log πθ(as|s) + ( 1
N + ϵ) · A(az, z)∇log πθ(az|z).
Here, we use the Taylor approximation again to approximate ∇J (θt−1
−z ) with ∇J (θt−1), which is
also a convention in influence analysis for supervised learning [26, 33, 34, 31, 41, 58, 29, 46],
∇J (θt−1
−z ) ≈∇J (θt−1) + ∂∇J t−1
ϵ
∂ϵ

ϵ=0

(ϵ = −1
N ) −(ϵ = 0)

= ∇J (θt−1) −1
N gt−1
z
,
(9)
where gt−1
z
= ∇log πθt−1(az|z)A(az, z).
22

--- Page 23 ---
For other variants, the formulation for gt−1
z
also needs to be adapted, for example, the group relative
formulation for GRPO [7]:
gt−1
z
= 1
G
X
i≤G
∇log πθt−1(az,i|z) ˆA(az,i, z),
where az,i means the i-th answer from the model given the input question/prompt z, ˆA(az,i, z) =

πθ(ai|s)
πθold(ai|s)A(s, ai), clip

πθ(ai|s)
πθold(ai|s), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

A(s, ai)

−β
GKL (πθ∥πref).
Hence, we have,
∆Dt(z) ≈ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2
≈ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηtD
∇J (θt−1) −1
N gt−1
z
,
∇J (θt−1) −1
N gt−1
z
E
=2ηt
N
D
∇J (θt−1), gt−1
z
E
−ηt
N 2
D
∇gt−1
z
, gt−1
z
E
≈2ηt
N
D
∇J (θt−1), gt−1
z
E
,
(10)
where
D
:, :
E
is the inner-product operator. By substituting the approximation for Dt(z) into Eq.(7),
we have that,
D(z) = ∆DT + ∆DT −1 + ... + ∆D1 ≈
X
t
2ηt
N
D
∇J (θt), gt
z
E
,
(11)
where 0 ≤t < T.
C
Mathematical Proof: Error Bound
We provide a worst-case error bound for the proposed approximation, demonstrating its robustness
under some mild assumptions.
Proposition 1.
Under the assumptions that the log-likelihood function log πθ(a|s) exhibits ℓ-
Lipschitz continuity and that the adventure value is upper-bounded by Amax, the approximation error
is bounded as follows:
D(z) −ˆD(z)
 ≤O
hηmax(4N + 4)
N
(ℓAmax)2 + 2ηℓ2Amax
i
T

,
(12)
where T denotes the maximum number of iterations and N is the number of all training data.
Our estimator is based on the time-domain differential operation over D(z) = P
t ∆Dt(z), and
performing Taylor approximation on ∆Dt(z). Hence, the overall error is bounded by
|D(z) −ˆD(z)| ≤T|Dt(z) −ˆDt(z)|.
We set d as the upper bound of the norm of the policy gradient. Hence, we have d ≤Amaxℓ, where ℓ
is the Lipschitz constant of the log-likelihood function log πθ(a|s) with ℓ-Lipschitz continuity.
According to Eq.(10), the error comes from the following parts: The first approximation term,
∆Dt(z) ≈ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2, using the first-order Taylor approximation and the
gradient-ascent algorithm in RFT, the error is bounded by
∆Dt(z) −
h
ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2i
=

h
J (θt) −J (θt−1)
i
−
h
J (θt
−z) −J (θt−1
−z )
i
−
h
ηt||∇J (θt−1)||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2i
≤2ℓηd + 2ηd2.
(13)
23

--- Page 24 ---
The second approximation term in approximating ∇J (θt−1
−z ) with ∇J (θt−1), that is, ∇J (θt−1
−z ) ≈
∇J (θt−1) −1
N gt−1
z
. We have
 ηt||∇J (θt−1
−z )||2 −ηt||∇J (θt−1) −1
N gt−1
z
||2 ≤2ηd2 + 2η
N d2 + η
N 2 d2.
(14)
The last error term comes from ignoring ηt
N 2
D
∇gt−1
z
, gt−1
z
E
in the final approximation in Eq.(10),
this error is bounded by
η
N2 d2.
Hence, the overall error is bounded by
|D(z) −ˆD(z)| ≤T|Dt(z) −ˆDt(z)| ≤T

2ℓηd + 2ηd2 + 2ηd2 + 2η
N d2 + η
N 2 d2 + η
N 2 d2
= T

(4η + 2η
N + 2η
N 2 )d2 + 2ℓηd

≤T

(4η + 4η
N )d2 + 2ℓηd

= T
ηmax(4N + 4)
N
d2 + 2ℓηd

≤
hηmax(4N + 4)
N
(ℓAmax)2 + 2ηℓ2Amax
i
T
(15)
24