--- Page 1 ---
Second-order Optimization under Heavy-Tailed Noise:
Hessian Clipping and Sample Complexity Limits
Abdurakhmon Sadiev∗
KAUST†
Center of Excellence for Generative AI
Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Center of Excellence for Generative AI
Ilyas Fatkhullin
ETH Zurich, ETH AI Center,
Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Heavy-tailed noise is pervasive in modern machine learning applications, arising
from data heterogeneity, outliers, and non-stationary stochastic environments.
While second-order methods can significantly accelerate convergence in light-tailed
or bounded-noise settings, such algorithms are often brittle and lack guarantees
under heavy-tailed noise—precisely the regimes where robustness is most critical.
In this work, we take a first step toward a theoretical understanding of second-order
optimization under heavy-tailed noise. We consider a setting where stochastic
gradients and Hessians have only bounded p-th moments, for some p ∈(1, 2], and
establish tight lower bounds on the sample complexity of any second-order method.
We then develop a variant of normalized stochastic gradient descent that leverages
second-order information and provably matches these lower bounds. To address
the instability caused by large deviations, we introduce a novel algorithm based on
gradient and Hessian clipping, and prove high-probability upper bounds that nearly
match the fundamental limits. Our results provide the first comprehensive sample
complexity characterization for second-order optimization under heavy-tailed noise.
This positions Hessian clipping as a robust and theoretically sound strategy for
second-order algorithm design in heavy-tailed regimes.
1
Introduction
We consider the stochastic optimization problem
min
x∈Rd F(x),
F(x) := Eξ∼D[f(x, ξ)],
(1)
with F a smooth (but potentially nonconvex) objective, and ξ a random variable drawn from an
unknown distribution. While first-order methods are widely used in practice due to their simplicity
and scalability, the application of second-order methods remains limited in stochastic settings. This is
in stark contrast to their strong theoretical properties: second-order methods such as Newton’s method
[Bennett, 1916, Kantorovich, 1948], cubic regularization [Nesterov and Polyak, 2006, Nesterov,
2008], their variants for finite-sum minimization [Kovalev et al., 2019], quasi-Newton [Dennis and
Moré, 1977], and adaptive second-order algorithms [Doikov et al., 2024] can offer provably faster
convergence rates. Furthermore, complexity-theoretic results demonstrate that second-order methods
can outperform first-order ones in noiseless (or finite sum) settings, often with moderate additional
computational cost [Agarwal and Hazan, 2018, Arjevani et al., 2019, 2020] only.
∗Corresponding author: abdurakhmon.sadiev@kaust.edu.sa
†King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

--- Page 2 ---
Second-order methods are highly sensitive to noise.
First-order stochastic optimization (FOSO)
methods–such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its adaptive variants–are well understood,
both algorithmically and from a complexity–theoretic perspective. These methods enjoy optimal
convergence guarantees under a broad class of noise models, including bounded variance and infinite
variance regimes [Gower et al., 2019, Khaled and Richtárik, 2020, Yang et al., 2023, Wang et al.,
2021, Fatkhullin et al., 2025]. In contrast, the development of second-order stochastic optimization
(SOSO) methods has been significantly hampered by their extreme sensitivity to noise, particularly
in Hessian estimation. Existing second-order methods suffer from both practical instability and
overly restrictive theoretical assumptions. For instance, stochastic extensions of cubic regularization
[Ghadimi et al., 2017, Tripuraneni et al., 2018] and its momentum variants [Chayti et al., 2024] require
bounded noise assumptions, which are rarely satisfied in modern large-scale learning tasks. Other
frameworks–such as trust-region methods [Arjevani et al., 2020], recursive momentum schemes [Tran
and Cutkosky, 2021], and extrapolation-based approaches [Antonakopoulos et al., 2022, Agafonov
et al., 2023]–relax this to bounded variance, but still fall short of handling more realistic heavy-tailed
noise distributions. To the best of our knowledge, no existing SOSO method can operate reliably
under noise conditions with unbounded variance, highlighting a fundamental gap in the current
landscape of stochastic optimization.
Heavy-tailed noise in gradients and Hessians.
In recent years, the first-order optimization litera-
ture has increasingly moved beyond the bounded variance assumption, adopting more general noise
models that better reflect empirical observations in modern applications. A particularly influential
framework is the bounded central moment condition (p-BCM), which assumes
E [∥∇f(x, ξ) −∇F(x)∥p] ≤σp,
for some p ∈(1, 2],
thereby allowing for heavy-tailed noise with unbounded variance. This model aligns well with
empirical findings in deep learning and reinforcement learning (RL), where heavy-tailed gradient
noise is often observed [Garg et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2020, Ahn et al., 2024, Simsekli et al.,
2019, Battash et al., 2024]. Algorithms designed for robustness under p-BCM noise, such as those
employing gradient clipping or normalization, have demonstrated both strong empirical performance
and rigorous convergence guarantees [Zhang et al., 2020, Hübler et al., 2025]. These developments
suggest that heavy-tailed noise models are not only practically relevant, but also theoretically tractable,
providing a principled foundation for algorithm design. Given that second-order methods are even
more sensitive to noise than first-order ones, this naturally motivates the extension of such robustness
principles to the second-order setting. In this work, we take this step and aim to
develop a comprehensive theory of second-order stochastic optimization under heavy-tailed noise.
Specifically, we assume access to unbiased stochastic gradients and Hessian-vector products, each
satisfying a p-BCM-type condition:
E

∥∇2f(x, ξ) −∇2F(x)∥p
op

≤σp
h,
for some p ∈(1, 2].
Our goal is to characterize the fundamental performance limits and develop practical algorithms for
minimizing F(x) in this setting, with a focus on obtaining guarantees for finding points with small
gradient norm ∥∇F(x)∥≤ε, either in expectation or with high probability.3
From gradient to Hessian clipping.
Gradient clipping has become a standard tool in modern
machine learning, particularly due to its empirical success in stabilizing training under heavy-tailed
noise and ill-conditioned objectives [Pascanu et al., 2013, Schulman et al., 2017]. Theoretically, it
has been shown to offer robustness under relaxed smoothness and moment assumptions [Polyak
and Tsypkin, 1979, Jakoveti´c et al., 2023], and enable high-probability guarantees with logarithmic
(sub-Gaussian) dependence on the failure probability. The latter property of gradient clipping is
in stark contrast to the classical linear algorithms, e.g., SGD, Momentum SGD, for which high
probability lower bounds were recently established [Fatkhullin et al., 2025]. These properties are
well-documented across both convex [Nazin et al., 2019, Gorbunov et al., 2020, Davis et al., 2021,
Gorbunov et al., 2024b, Liu and Zhou, 2023, Gorbunov et al., 2024a, Puchkin et al., 2024, Armacki
et al., 2023] and nonconvex [Sadiev et al., 2023, Nguyen et al., 2023, Cutkosky and Mehta, 2021,
3It would be interesting to extend our results to finding second-order stationary points [Nesterov and Polyak,
2006, Arjevani et al., 2020], but we leave this investigation for future work.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Hübler et al., 2025] regimes. Crucially, high-probability results are both theoretically and practically
appealing as they guarantee the performance of individual runs rather than for the average-case
behavior.
Despite these advances, the robustness enabled by gradient clipping remains largely confined to
first-order methods. In the second-order setting, where both gradients and Hessians may be corrupted
by heavy-tailed noise, comparable algorithmic tools are conspicuously lacking. The core difficulty is
not just technical but conceptual: existing SOSO algorithms do not include mechanisms to suppress
the influence of extreme noise in Hessian estimates. This leads us to a fundamental question for the
design of robust second-order stochastic methods:
Can we develop second-order algorithms with high-probability convergence guarantees under
simultaneous heavy-tailed noise in both gradients and Hessians?
Figure 1: Sample complexity comparison for
FOSO and SOSO depending on the tail index p.
Each line corresponds to the leading term in the
sample complexity for each class of algorithms.
These leading terms match in upper and lower
bounds, so this characterization is exact. We
establish the characterization along the entire
green line complementing prior work [Arjevani
et al., 2023] for p = 2.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Iteration, t
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
F(xt)
Clip NSGDHess
NSGDHess
Clip SGD
NSGDM
Figure 2: Performance of algorithms on a sim-
ple problem, F(x) = 0.5 ∥x∥2, d = 10 with
synthetic noise generated from a two-sided
Pareto distribution with tail index p = 1.1. We
observe that algorithms without clipping, NS-
GDM and NSGDHess, suffer significantly from
noise. This motivates our more in-depth study
involving gradient and Hessian clipping for high
probability convergence.
Contributions:
• Tight lower bound. We establish a minimax lower bound on the sample complexity of any
SOSO algorithm under p-BCM noise model: Ω

∆σh
ε2
  σ
ε

1
p−1 
, where ∆denotes the initial
suboptimality, and σ, σh denote the scale of noise in gradients and Hessians, respectively.
This bound improves over the best known complexity for first-order methods [Zhang et al.,
2020, Hübler et al., 2025] by a factor of 1/ε uniformly for all p ∈(1, 2], demonstrating
that second-order methods can yield provable advantages even in the heavy-tailed regime;
see Figure 1. Moreover, our result implies that increasing the order of the algorithm (e.g.,
using higher-order derivatives) cannot improve the rate under the same noise assumptions
significantly.
• Optimal algorithm. We develop a second-order stochastic algorithm that achieves the lower
bound (up to constants) in the regime L ≤σh, where L denotes the Lipschitz constant of the
gradient. The algorithm attains the sample complexity O

∆(L+σh)
ε2
  σ
ε

1
p−1 
, and is, to
the best of our knowledge, the first second-order method that provably works under p-BCM
noise. Notably, our method does not require second-order smoothness of the objective. This
result holds even in the classical setting p = 2, highlighting the broader implications of the
approach.
• High-probability convergence via Hessian clipping. We propose a clipped variant of our
algorithm that incorporates both gradient and Hessian clipping–the latter introduced here
for the first time. We show that this variant achieves near-optimal sample complexity with
high probability, incurring only a poly-logarithmic overhead in the failure probability. This
3

--- Page 4 ---
significantly extends the robustness of SOSO methods, enabling strong guarantees not only
in expectation but also with high confidence.
Our results are primarily theoretical and validated through synthetic experiments with controllable
heavy-tailed noise. While one component of our algorithm (in its unclipped form) has previously been
applied in reinforcement learning settings [Fatkhullin et al., 2023], its broader practical deployment
remains an open challenge. In particular, several questions must be addressed to make these methods
viable in real-world applications: How can we reduce hyperparameter tuning overhead? Are there
default configurations that are robust across problem classes? Is clipping truly necessary, or can it
be systematically replaced by normalization techniques, as recent work suggests in the first-order
context [Hübler et al., 2025]? We view our contributions as a foundational step towards a principled
understanding of second-order methods under realistic, heavy-tailed noise conditions, and hope they
spur further theoretical and algorithmic advances in this direction.
2
Notations and Assumptions
We use the common notation for natural numbers N = {0, 1, . . . }, and let [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}.
Throughout this paper, d ∈N≥1 denotes the dimension of the optimization problem (1). We use
O (·) , Ω(·) for sample complexity notations, which preserve the dominating term in the target
accuracy ε > 0 along with the multiplicative constants such as initial suboptimality ∆, smoothness
constants Lr, r ≥1, the variance of higher-order stochastic oracles σr, r ≥1. When we write ¯O (·),
we suppress the dependence on all parameters except for accuracy ε in the dominating term. As in
Carmon et al. [2020], for any q-th order tensor T ∈R⊗qd, we define the support of T as supp{T}
def
=
{i ∈[d] | Ti ̸= 0}, where Ti is the (q −1)-th order tensor, given by [Ti]j1,...,jq−1 = Ti,j1,...,jq−1.
We make the following assumptions throughout the paper.
Assumption 1 (Lower Boundedness). The objective function F is lower bounded by F ∗> −∞.
Assumption 2 (L-smoothness). The objective function F is L-smooth, i.e., F is differentiable and
for all x, y ∈Rd, we have ∥∇F(x) −∇F(y)∥≤L ∥x −y∥.
Assumption 3 (p-BCM). We have access to stochastic gradients ∇f(x, ξ) such that E [∇f(x, ξ)] =
∇F(x). Moreover, there exist p ∈(1, 2] and σ > 0 such that
E [∥∇f(x, ξ) −∇F(x)∥p] ≤σp
for all x ∈Rd.
Assumption 4 (p-BCM for Hessian). The function F is twice differentiable and we additionally have
access to stochastic Hessian-vector products ∇2f(x, ξ)·v for any v ∈Rd such that E

∇2f(x, ξ)

=
∇2F(x). Moreover, there exist p ∈(1, 2] and σh > 0 such that
E
h∇2f(x, ξ) −∇2F(x)
p
op
i
≤σp
h
for all x ∈Rd.
3
Lower Complexity Bounds for SOSO under p-BCM
To establish lower bounds, we build on a technique developed in a series of works [Arjevani et al.,
2023, Carmon et al., 2020, Arjevani et al., 2020], which introduced a worst-case non-convex function
exhibiting the zero-chain property: starting from the origin, each algorithmic iteration reveals
information about a single coordinate only. Leveraging this framework, Zhang et al. [2020] derived
the first lower bounds for FOSO under heavy-tailed noise, assuming the p-th moment of the stochastic
gradient is bounded, i.e., E [∥∇f(x, ξ)∥p] ≤Gp, which differs from Assumption 3.
In our work, we assume access to a q-th order stochastic oracle, meaning that each query yields
stochastic approximations of derivatives of orders 1 to q at a given point x. This oracle model was
formally introduced by Arjevani et al. [2020]. Building on their proof technique, we derive new lower
bounds under the assumption that each stochastic derivative has a bounded p-th central moment.
Function class. We consider the class of q-times differentiable functions (q ≥1) satisfying two key
properties: (i) functional boundedness, i.e., F(0) −F ∗≤∆; and (ii) Lipschitz continuity of each
derivative up to order q, i.e., for all x, y ∈Rd and r ∈[q],
∥∇rF(x) −∇rF(y)∥op ≤Lr∥x −y∥.
4

--- Page 5 ---
We denote this function class by F(∆, L1:q), where L1:q = {L1, L2, . . . , Lq}. Note that the constant
L from Assumption 2 corresponds to L1 in this notation.
Oracle class. We now define the oracle model. For a fixed function F ∈F(∆, L1:q), a stochastic
q-th order oracle is defined as follows: for any x ∈Rd and ξ ∼D,
Oq
f(x, ξ)
def
=
 f(x, ξ), ∇f(x, ξ), ∇2f(x, ξ), . . . , ∇qf(x, ξ)

,
where
each
component
satisfies
the
unbiasedness
conditions:
Eξ∼D[f(x, ξ)]
=
F(x),
and
Eξ∼D[∇rf(x, ξ)] = ∇rF(x),
∀r ∈[q]. We define the oracle class Oq(F, σ1:q)
as the set of all such stochastic oracles for which the p-th moment of the estimation error (with
p ∈[1, 2)) satisfies
Eξ∼D
h
∥∇rf(x, ξ) −∇rF(x)∥p
op
i
≤σp
r,
∀r ∈[q], ∀x ∈Rd.
For r = 1, this recovers σ1 = σ from Assumption 3, and for r = 2, we similarly have σ2 = σh from
Assumption 4.
Algorithm class. To prove lower bounds, we will work with a class of zero-respecting algorithms.
The formal definition is provided below. The reason why this class of algorithms is interesting for us
is based on its property: at each iteration of such an algorithm, at most one new coordinate can be
revealed.
Definition 1. We call a stochastic q-th order algorithm A zero-respecting if for any function F and
any p-th order oracle Oq
F , the iterates {xt}t∈N generated by A via querying Oq
F satisfy the following
property: supp {xt} ⊂S
i<t supp

Oq
F (xi, ξi)
	
,
∀t ∈N with probability one with respect to the
randomness of the algorithm and the realizations of {ξt}t∈N.
Theorem 1. Let q ∈N≥1, and let ∆> 0, L1:q
def
= (L1, . . . , Lq), σ1:q
def
= (σ1, . . . , σq) and ε ≤O(σ1).
Then, there exists F ∈F(∆, L1:q) and a corresponding noisy oracle Oq
F ∈O(F, σ1:q) such that for
any q-th order zero-respecting algorithm, the number of oracle queries required to find an ε-stationary
point (with constant probability) is lower bounded by
Ω(1) · ∆
ε
σ1
ε

p
p−1 min
(
min
r∈{2,...,q}
σr
σ1

1
r−1
, min
r′∈[q]
Lr′
ε
 1
r′ )
.
(2)
Moreover,
this
lower
bounds
is
realized
by
a
construction
of
dimension
Θ

∆
ε min

minr∈{2,...,q}

σr
σ1

1
r−1 , minr′∈[q]

Lr′
ε
 1
r′ 
.
The proof of Theorem 1 is deferred to Appendix D. In Theorem 1 we provide lower bounds for any
q ∈N≥1, which corresponds to the order of an oracle used in an optimization algorithm. When
the oracle order satisfies q ≥2, the algorithm gains access to stochastic curvature information,
enabling more accurate prediction of the function or gradient behavior between consecutive iterates.
This richer information can potentially lead to tighter worst-case complexity limits compared to
first-order methods. Since the main focus of our work is on the second-order setting, we now
discuss the complexity result from Theorem 1 for q = 2. For second-order methods, q = 2, under
Assumptions 2, 3, 4 and, additionally, (possibly) assuming the Hessian is Lipschitz continuous with
constant Lh, we have
Ω(1) · min
∆σh
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 , ∆Lσ
ε3
σ
ε

1
p−1 , ∆√Lhσ
ε
5/2
σ
ε

1
p−1 
,
(3)
where the parameters satisfy σ = σ1, σh = σ2, L = L1, L2 = Lh. We will now discuss each term
separately, in different regimes.
First-order optimization with Lipschitz gradient. When we do not have access to the second-order
information and the objective function has Lipschitz continuous gradient only, but not any higher
derivative, our lower bounds (3) reduces to the second term:
Ω
∆Lσ
ε3
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
5

--- Page 6 ---
This bound exactly matches (up to a numerical constant factor) the previously known lower bounds
for first-order stochastic optimization under p-BCM [Zhang et al., 2020], and the corresponding upper
bound achieved by normalized SGD [Hübler et al., 2025]. Several other algorithms, like Clip-SGD
and NSGD with momentum and clipping also nearly match this complexity lower bound, up to
additional polylogarithmic terms in 1/ε and polynomial terms in δ, L and σ [Zhang et al., 2020,
Cutkosky and Mehta, 2021, Nguyen et al., 2023].
First-order optimization under higher-order smoothness.
The second case worth discussing is
when we (still) do not have access to stochastic Hessian, but we know that the objective function has
Lipschitz continuous second-order derivatives. Then our lower bound (3) becomes
Ω

min
∆Lσ
ε3
σ
ε

1
p−1 , ∆√Lhσ
ε
5/2
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
The last term in the above bound nearly matches with the complexity of the method called NIGT with
clipping, by Cutkosky and Mehta [2021], in terms of its dependence on 1/ε, up to logarithmic factors.
Unfortunately, there is still a small discrepancy with the upper bound in the dependence on other
parameters and with the fact that Cutkosky and Mehta [2021] use a slightly stronger (non-central)
assumption E [∥∇f(x, ξ)∥p] ≤Gp instead of our p-BCM. We believe our bound is tight and can be
achieved with a more careful analysis of NIGT type algorithm under the p-BCM assumption.
Second-order optimization with only Lipschitz gradient.
Finally, we wish to discuss an important
setting, which is rarely discussed in the literature on second-order optimization. Higher-order
smoothness can be challenging to verify in practice. Moreover, even when it is possible, the estimates
of Lh can be too large to be useful. Thus we pay attention to the case when we have access to
stochastic Hessian, but the second derivative can be non-continuous, i.e., Lh →+∞. Our lower
bound (3) provides new insights on this interesting setting, simplifying to
Ω

min
∆σh
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 , ∆Lσ
ε3
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
As we can see, the first term corresponding to the second-order information has better dependence on
an accuracy ε, and can be potentially much smaller than the second term. Moreover, this complexity
is not impacted with the constants corresponding to higher-order smoothness, which potentially gives
us the possibility of designing second-order methods with complexity that does not depend on Lh
and higher order smoothness constants. However, this is merely a lower bound, which does not give
us any algorithmic solution yet. The question we investigate in the next section is
Can we design an algorithm handling heavy-tailed noise with complexity O

∆σh
ε2
  σ
ε

1
p−1 
?
4
Near-optimal Second-Order Method under p-BCM
In the last decade, the second-order stochastic optimization (SOSO) has been extensively studied
under stronger noise assumptions. We will first review the existing approaches, particularly focusing
on the development in the non-convex setup. First, Tripuraneni et al. [2018] proposed and analyzed
a Stochastic Cubic Newton (SCN) method, achieving ¯O(ε−7/2) sample complexity. They require
a strong bounded noise assumption, use large mini-batches and importantly, this complexity is not
order-optimal. Later Arjevani et al. [2020] established lower bounds for SOSO for finding first-order
stationary points and proposed two algorithms: SGD with recursive variance reduction and stochastic
Hessian-vector products (HVP-RVR), and subsampled cubic-regularized trust-region method with
HVP-RVR. Both algorithms achieve ¯O(ε−3) sample complexities, which is minimax optimal when
the variances of stochastic gradient and Hessian are bounded. Besides strong noise assumptions, their
algorithms require large Hessian batch sizes, since they used HVP-RVR subroutine to update the
momentum term. To overcome the large batch-size requirement, Tran and Cutkosky [2021] designed
a simpler algorithm: SGD with Hessian-corrected momentum (with optional normalization), called
SGDHess. Thanks to the Hessian corrected momentum term, their methods also achieve ¯O(ε−3)
sample complexity with any batch size ≥1. Recently, Chayti et al. [2024] proposed a variant of SCN
6

--- Page 7 ---
with momentum without a large batch requirement. However, their analysis requires the bounded
noise assumption and only achieves ¯O(ε−7/2) sample complexity.4
To summarize, all above-mentioned works require strong noise assumptions: bounded noise and
bounded variance. Moreover, their sample complexities also depend on second-order smoothness Lh,
which can be potentially infinite, as discussed in the previous section. We refer to Table 1 for the
summary of existing results.
Algorithm 1 NSGDHess (Normalized SGD with Hessian correction)
1: Input: Starting point x0 ∈Rd, a vector g0 ∈Rd, a stepsize γ > 0, momentum parameters
α > 0, the number of iterations T.
2: x1 = x0 −γ
g0
∥g0∥
3: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T −1 do
4:
Sample qt ∼U ([0, 1])
5:
ˆxt = qtxt + (1 −qt)xt−1
6:
Sample ξt, ˆξt ∼D independently
7:
gt = (1 −α)

gt−1 + ∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1)

+ α∇f(xt, ξt)
8:
xt+1 = xt −γ
gt
∥gt∥
9: end for
10: Output:
To design an optimal second-order algorithm without these limitations, we take an inspiration from
the recent developments in reinforcement learning [Salehkaleybar et al., 2022, Fatkhullin et al., 2023].
Their algorithms called SHARP and (N)HAR-PG are variants of SGDHess in [Tran and Cutkosky,
2021] with optional normalization step. We adapt one variant of their method to our general stochastic
optimization setting and present it in Algorithm 1. This algorithm computes a random interpolation
point ˆxt uniformly distributed between consecutive iterates xt−1 and xt. The method then evaluates
a stochastic gradient and a stochastic Hessian-vector product using independent samples ξt and ˆξt.
Finally, a recursive momentum is constructed before applying the normalization step.5 We are now
ready to state the convergence guarantee for Algorithm 1.
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, 3 and 4 hold. Let the initial gradient estimate be given by
g0 =
1
Binit
Binit
X
j=1
∇f(x0, ξ0,j), where Binit = max

1,
σ
ε

p
p−1 ,
σ
ε

p
2p−1 
.
Set stepsize as γ =
q
∆α1/p
(L+σh)T , momentum parameter as α = min {1, αeff}, where αeff =
max
  E0
T σ

p
2p−1 ,

∆(L+σh)
T σ2

p
2p−1 
, E0
= 2σ/B
p−1
p
init .
Then, Algorithm 1 guarantees that
1
T
PT −1
t=0 E [∥∇F(xt)∥] ≤ε with total sample complexity
O
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 + σ
ε
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
(4)
The proof is deferred to Appendix E. We also investigate different choices of g0 and their influence on
the total sample complexity rate in Appendix E. We find that while the initial batch size to estimate
g0 is not necessary for convergence, it helps to slightly improve the total sample complexity.
Discussion:
Comparing this result with Theorem 1, we observe that our upper bound (4) matches our
lower bound–the first term in (3) in terms of the target accuracy ε. Moreover, when ∆(L + σh) ≥σε,
we have a tight upper bound, which exactly matches the lower bound from the previous section in
4However, in the noiseless case their complexity has better ¯O(ε−3/2) iteration complexity compared to
¯O(ε−2) for SGDHess.
5Normalization step for this method is important for our analysis under p-BCM. However, it can be removed
when p = 2, or when additional clipping is used, as in the next section.
7

--- Page 8 ---
the leading term (up to a numerical constant). Moreover, since our upper bound does not depend on
constant Lh, it explains our observations in Section 3 regarding the limit case Lh →∞, and answers
the raised question affirmatively. We refer to Table 1 for more technical comparison with prior work.
5
Hessian Clipping for High-probability Convergence
In Section 4 we provided an in-expectation guarantee for Algorithm 1. While in-expectation guar-
antees are useful in the case when we are allowed to run a method multiple times to analyze its
average-case behavior, it can be impractical. In may real-world scenarios, only a single run of a
methods can be performed due to computational or time constraints. Thus, our main goal in this
section is to conduct high-probability analysis for Algorithm 1 or its modification.
Since we work in the unbounded variance case, which corresponds to heavy-tailed noise, it is
important to ensure that the analyzed method is robust to such noise. Following works of Gorbunov
et al. [2020], Cutkosky and Mehta [2021], Sadiev et al. [2023], Nguyen et al. [2023], we propose
a new algorithm, called Normalized SGD with momentum and Hessian clipping. It is formally
presented as Algorithm 2, where compared to Algorithm 1 we also incorporate gradient clipping and
Hessian clipping. Formally, a clipping operator (clipping for short) is defined as
clip(v, λ) = min

1, λ
∥v∥

v
for any v ̸= 0 from Rd,
(5)
where λ > 0 is called the clipping level/threshold.
Algorithm 2 Clip NSGDHess (Normalized SGD with Hessian correction and clipping)
1: Input: Starting point x0 ∈Rd, a vector g0 ∈Rd, a stepsize γ > 0, momentum parameters
α > 0, clipping levels λ > 0, ¯λh > 0, the number of iterations T.
2: x1 = x0 and g0 = 0
3: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T −1 do
4:
Sample qt ∼U ([0, 1])
5:
ˆxt = qt xt + (1 −qt) xt−1
6:
Sample ξt, ˆξt ∼D independently
7:
gt = (1−α)

gt−1 + γ clip

γ−1∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), ¯λh

+α clip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ)
8:
xt+1 = xt −γ
gt
∥gt∥
9: end for
10: Output:
As in Algorithm 1, we use normalization in the gradient update (line 8), which allows the next point
xt+1 to stay in the ball with center at xt of radius γ. The main difference between Algorithms 1
and 2 is in the momentum term. To enhance robustness, we do not only clip the gradient, but also
the Hessian-vector product. As we mentioned above, gradient clipping is a common approach, but
Hessian clipping is new, and it allows us to provide the first high-probability guarantees for second-
order stochastic optimization without light-tail noise assumptions. It is worth to draw attention to the
term
γ clip

γ−1∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), ¯λh

.
(6)
Observe that clipping the entire Hessian based on its operator norm is very costly since it typically
requires O(d2) arithmetic operations (e.g., using power iteration [Golub and Van Loan, 2013]
or Lanczos algorithm [Lanczos, 1950, Saad, 2011]). Instead of clipping the stochastic Hessian,
we clip the Hessian-vector product, which is computationally tractable, and only requires O(d)
operations. Thus, the computation of this clipped Hessian-vector product can be easily implemented
via backpropagation and subsequent “vector” clipping (5). Another reason why we prefer to use this
8

--- Page 9 ---
form of clipping comes from the analysis; we want to preserve the following useful property:
Eqt,ˆξt
h
∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1)
i
=
Eqt
h
Eˆξt
h
∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)
i
(xt −xt−1)
i
=
Eqt

∇2F(ˆxt)(xt −xt−1)

=
Z 1
0
∇2F(qxt + (1 −q)xt−1)(xt −xt−1)dq
=
∇F(xt) −∇F(xt−1).
(7)
This would not hold were we to use direct Hessian matrix clipping. Instead, we prove that the
expectation of (6) will approximately be equal to (7) when ¯λh is selected properly. By smoothness
and gradient step, we have ∥∇F(xt)−∇F(xt−1)∥≤L∥xt −xt−1∥= Lγ, meaning the expectation
is bounded. To provide the analysis, we need to rewrite the clipped Hessian-vector product as follows
γ clip

γ−1∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), ¯λh

= clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), γ¯λh

,
where we denote λh = γ¯λh. The former formulation in the above formula is useful for implementa-
tion, since as we will see, λh ∼O(γα−1/p) and λ ∼O(α−1/p). Thus, λ and ¯λh are of the same order
∼O(α−1/p) = O(T
1
2p−1 ), which makes it easier to tune these two parameters together in practice.
The latter formulation will be used in the high-probability analysis. We are now ready to state the
main theorem of this section.
Theorem 3. Let Assumptions 1,2,3, and 4 hold, and define the initial optimality gap as ∆1 :=
F(x0) −F∗. Let δ ∈(0, 1] and T ≥1 be such that log(8T/δ) ≥1. Suppose Algorithm 2 is
executed with the following settings: momentum parameter α = T −
p
2p−1 , clipping levels λ =
max

4√L∆1,
σ
α1/p
	
, λh = 2γ(L+σh)
α1/p
, stepsize γ satisfying:
γ ≤O
 
min
(r
∆1
LT , α
r
∆1
L ,
p
∆1/L
αT log(T/δ),
∆1
σα
p−1
p T log(T/δ)
,
s
∆1α1/p
(L + σh)T log(T/δ)
)!
.
Then, with probability at least 1−δ, the output of the algorithm satisfies: 1
T
PT −1
t=0 ∥∇F(xt)∥≤2∆1
γT .
As a result, the gradient norm converges at the rate
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥= O
 p
∆1(L + σh) + σ
T
p−1
2p−1
log
T
δ
!
with high probability.
The complete proof of Theorem 3 can be found in Appendix F. Disregarding the parameters
L, σ, σh, ∆1 in the choices of the stepsize and the clipping level, we see that the momentum parameter
and the stepsize decrease with the same rate ∼O(1/T
p
p−1 ), similarly to Algorithm 1. Also, as we
mentioned above, clipping levels λ and ¯λh have the same rate, and behave as ∼O(T
1
2p−1 ).
Corollary 1. In the setting of Theorem 3, Algorithm 2 ensures that 1
T
PT −1
t=0 ∥∇F(xt)∥≤ε, with
probability at least 1 −δ. To achieve this, the algorithm requires at most
O


 p
∆1(L + σh) + σ
ε
log 1
δε
! 2p−1
p−1 

first/second-order oracle calls.
According to the results of Theorem 3 and Corollary 1, we have shown that Algorithm 2 has a
near-optimal convergence rate in the dependence on ε. Moreover, the complexity has a logarithmic
dependence on 1/δ, which is better than a polynomial dependence that can be achieved by directly
translating the in-expectation result of Theorem 2 to a high probability one using Markov’s inequality.
Unfortunately, the dependence on ∆1, L, σ, σh does not match the lower bound (3).
Comparison with [Liu et al., 2023b].
Recently, and under additional strong assumptions, Liu
et al. [2023b] analyzed a momentum-based, variance-reduced first-order method, and obtained rates
9

--- Page 10 ---
similar to those in our Corollary 1. However, they assume individual smoothness (i.e., ∥∇f(x, ξ) −
∇f(y, ξ)∥≤ℓ∥x −y∥for all x, y ∈Rd and all realizations of the random variable ξ). However,
individual smoothness is a very strong assumption which implies boundedness of the stochastic
Hessian, i.e., ∥∇2f(x, ξ)∥≤ℓa.s., for all x ∈Rd. We also note that under individual smoothness,
fast p-independent rates can be obtained, e.g., Lei et al. [2019] achieve ¯O(ε−4) complexity for SGD
under individual smoothness.
6
Limitations and Future Work
While our proposed method with Hessian clipping has many desirable properties, such as near-optimal
sample complexity, batch-free and high-probability convergence, under mild statistical assumptions,
it also has several limitations. First, it requires tuning three extra parameters compared to, e.g., vanilla
SGD [Fatkhullin et al., 2025] or Normalized SGD [Hübler et al., 2025]. It would be interesting
to investigate if such extensive tuning can be removed for second-order methods. Second, while
our sample complexity is near optimal, it does not match our lower bound exactly in all important
parameters. Moreover, while we mainly pay attention to the leading stochastic terms in the complexity,
our methods do not recover optimal deterministic complexities of second-order methods. Perhaps
a different analysis technique for clipping and some algorithmic modifications (like Newton type
preconditioning [Chayti et al., 2024]) are required to exactly match the upper and lower bounds.
Third, high probability upper bounds are derived for a fixed confidence level δ rather than uniformly
for all δ ∈(0, 1) (as e.g., in [Liu et al., 2023a, Hübler et al., 2025]) and the algorithm’s parameters
depend on this choice. This is limiting as it does not necessarily imply high probability convergence
for a fixed parameter choice. Finally, while we make an important progress in the fundamental
understanding of second-order stochastic optimization, such results should always be interpreted with
caution. In practice, the overhead of second-order methods (computing Hessian information or even
Hessian-vector products) and the challenge of tuning additional hyperparameters (such as clipping
thresholds for both gradients and Hessians) can be significant.
Acknowledgements
The research reported in this publication was supported by funding from King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology (KAUST): i) KAUST Baseline Research Scheme, ii) CRG Grant ORFS-
CRG12-2024-6460, and iii) Center of Excellence for Generative AI, under award number 5940. The
work of I.F. is supported by ETH AI Center Doctoral Fellowship.
References
M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. Deep
learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on
computer and communications security, pages 308–318, 2016.
A. Agafonov, D. Kamzolov, A. Gasnikov, A. Kavis, K. Antonakopoulos, V. Cevher, and M. Takáˇc.
Advancing the lower bounds: An accelerated, stochastic, second-order method with optimal
adaptation to inexactness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01570, 2023.
N. Agarwal and E. Hazan. Lower bounds for higher-order convex optimization. In Conference On
Learning Theory, pages 774–792. PMLR, 2018.
K. Ahn, X. Cheng, M. Song, C. Yun, A. Jadbabaie, and S. Sra. Linear attention is (maybe) all
you need (to understand transformer optimization). In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
K. Antonakopoulos, A. Kavis, and V. Cevher. Extra-newton: A first approach to noise-adaptive
accelerated second-order methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
29859–29872, 2022.
Y. Arjevani, O. Shamir, and R. Shiff. Oracle complexity of second-order methods for smooth convex
optimization. Mathematical Programming, 178(1):327–360, 2019.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Y. Arjevani, Y. Carmon, J. C. Duchi, D. J. Foster, A. Sekhari, and K. Sridharan. Second-order
information in non-convex stochastic optimization: Power and limitations. In Conference on
Learning Theory, pages 242–299. PMLR, 2020.
Y. Arjevani, Y. Carmon, J. C. Duchi, D. J. Foster, N. Srebro, and B. Woodworth. Lower bounds for
non-convex stochastic optimization. Mathematical Programming, 199(1-2):165–214, 2023.
A. Armacki, P. Sharma, G. Joshi, D. Bajovic, D. Jakovetic, and S. Kar. High-probability conver-
gence bounds for nonlinear stochastic gradient descent under heavy-tailed noise. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18784, 2023.
B. Battash, L. Wolf, and O. Lindenbaum. Revisiting the noise model of stochastic gradient descent.
In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 4780–4788. PMLR,
2024.
A. A. Bennett. Newton’s method in general analysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 2(10):592–598, 1916.
S. Bubeck, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and G. Lugosi. Bandits with heavy tail. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 59(11):7711–7717, 2013.
Y. Carmon, J. C. Duchi, O. Hinder, and A. Sidford. Lower bounds for finding stationary points i.
Mathematical Programming, 184(1):71–120, 2020.
S. Cayci and A. Eryilmaz. Provably robust temporal difference learning for heavy-tailed rewards.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
E. M. Chayti, N. Doikov, and M. Jaggi. Improving stochastic cubic newton with momentum. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.19644, 2024.
A. Cutkosky and H. Mehta. Momentum improves normalized SGD. In Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 2260–2268. PMLR, 2020.
A. Cutkosky and H. Mehta. High-probability bounds for non-convex stochastic optimization with
heavy tails. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4883–4895, 2021.
A. Cutkosky and F. Orabona. Momentum-based variance reduction in non-convex sgd. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
D. Davis, D. Drusvyatskiy, L. Xiao, and J. Zhang. From low probability to high confidence in
stochastic convex optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):2237–2274,
2021.
J. E. Dennis, Jr and J. J. Moré. Quasi-newton methods, motivation and theory. SIAM review, 19(1):
46–89, 1977.
N. Doikov, K. Mishchenko, and Y. Nesterov. Super-universal regularized newton method. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 34(1):27–56, 2024.
I. Fatkhullin, A. Barakat, A. Kireeva, and N. He. Stochastic policy gradient methods: Improved
sample complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate policies. In Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202, pages 9827–9869, 2023.
I. Fatkhullin, F. Hübler, and G. Lan.
Can sgd handle heavy-tailed noise?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.04860, 2025.
S. Garg, J. Zhanson, E. Parisotto, A. Prasad, Z. Kolter, Z. Lipton, S. Balakrishnan, R. Salakhutdinov,
and P. Ravikumar. On proximal policy optimization’s heavy-tailed gradients. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3610–3619. PMLR, 2021.
S. Ghadimi, H. Liu, and T. Zhang. Second-order methods with cubic regularization under inexact
information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05782, 2017.
11

--- Page 12 ---
G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan. Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins University Press, 4th edition,
2013.
E. Gorbunov, M. Danilova, and A. Gasnikov. Stochastic optimization with heavy-tailed noise via
accelerated gradient clipping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15042–
15053, 2020.
E. Gorbunov, M. Danilova, I. Shibaev, P. Dvurechensky, and A. Gasnikov. High-probability com-
plexity bounds for non-smooth stochastic convex optimization with heavy-tailed noise. Journal of
Optimization Theory and Applications, pages 1–60, 2024a.
E. Gorbunov, A. Sadiev, M. Danilova, S. Horváth, G. Gidel, P. Dvurechensky, A. Gasnikov, and
P. Richtárik. High-probability convergence for composite and distributed stochastic minimization
and variational inequalities with heavy-tailed noise. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 15951–16070, 2024b.
R. M. Gower, N. Loizou, X. Qian, A. Sailanbayev, E. Shulgin, and P. Richtárik. SGD: General
analysis and improved rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5200–5209.
PMLR, 2019.
C. He, Z. Lu, D. Sun, and Z. Deng. Complexity of normalized stochastic first-order methods with
momentum under heavy-tailed noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11214, 2025.
F. Hübler, I. Fatkhullin, and N. He. From gradient clipping to normalization for heavy tailed sgd. In
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2025.
D. Jakoveti´c, D. Bajovi´c, A. K. Sahu, S. Kar, N. Milosevi´c, and D. Stamenkovi´c. Nonlinear gradient
mappings and stochastic optimization: A general framework with applications to heavy-tail noise.
SIAM Journal on Optimization, 33(2):394–423, 2023.
L. V. Kantorovich. Functional analysis and applied mathematics. Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk, 3
(6):89–185, 1948.
A. Khaled and P. Richtárik.
Better theory for SGD in the nonconvex world.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.03329, 2020.
N. Kornilov, O. Shamir, A. Lobanov, D. Dvinskikh, A. Gasnikov, I. Shibaev, E. Gorbunov, and
S. Horváth. Accelerated zeroth-order method for non-smooth stochastic convex optimization
problem with infinite variance. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
D. Kovalev, K. Mishchenko, and P. Richtárik. Stochastic newton and cubic newton methods with
simple local linear-quadratic rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01597, 2019.
C. Lanczos. An iteration method for the solution of the eigenvalue problem of linear differential and
integral operators. Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards, 45:255–282, 1950.
Y. Lei, T. Hu, G. Li, and K. Tang. Stochastic gradient descent for nonconvex learning without
bounded gradient assumptions. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
2019.
Z. Liu and Z. Zhou. Stochastic nonsmooth convex optimization with heavy-tailed noises. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.12277, 2023.
Z. Liu and Z. Zhou. Nonconvex stochastic optimization under heavy-tailed noises: Optimal conver-
gence without gradient clipping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19529, 2024.
Z. Liu, T. D. Nguyen, T. H. Nguyen, A. Ene, and H. Nguyen. High probability convergence of
stochastic gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 21884–
21914. PMLR, 2023a.
Z. Liu, J. Zhang, and Z. Zhou. Breaking the lower bound with (little) structure: Acceleration in non-
convex stochastic optimization with heavy-tailed noise. In Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference
on Learning Theory, volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2266–2290.
PMLR, 12–15 Jul 2023b.
12

--- Page 13 ---
A. V. Nazin, A. S. Nemirovsky, A. B. Tsybakov, and A. B. Juditsky. Algorithms of robust stochastic
optimization based on mirror descent method. Automation and Remote Control, 80:1607–1627,
2019.
Y. Nesterov. A method for unconstrained convex minimization problem with the rate of convergence
o (1/kˆ 2). In Doklady AN USSR, volume 269, pages 543–547, 1983.
Y. Nesterov. Accelerating the cubic regularization of newton’s method on convex problems. Mathe-
matical Programming, 112(1):159–181, 2008.
Y. Nesterov and B. T. Polyak. Cubic regularization of newton method and its global performance.
Mathematical programming, 108(1):177–205, 2006.
T. D. Nguyen, A. Ene, and H. L. Nguyen. Improved convergence in high probability of clipped
gradient methods with heavy tails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01119, 2023.
R. Pascanu, T. Mikolov, and Y. Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1310–1318. Pmlr, 2013.
B. T. Polyak and Y. Z. Tsypkin. Adaptive estimation algorithms: convergence, optimality, stability.
Avtomatika i telemekhanika, (3):71–84, 1979.
N. Puchkin, E. Gorbunov, N. Kutuzov, and A. Gasnikov. Breaking the heavy-tailed noise barrier
in stochastic optimization problems. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics, pages 856–864. PMLR, 2024.
Y. Saad. Numerical Methods for Large Eigenvalue Problems. SIAM, 2011.
A. Sadiev, M. Danilova, E. Gorbunov, S. Horváth, G. Gidel, P. Dvurechensky, A. Gasnikov, and
P. Richtárik. High-probability bounds for stochastic optimization and variational inequalities: the
case of unbounded variance. In International conference on machine learning, 2023.
S. Salehkaleybar, S. Khorasani, N. Kiyavash, N. He, and P. Thiran. Adaptive momentum-based
policy gradient with second-order information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08253, 2022.
J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
H. Sha, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, R. Liu, and H. Chen. Clip body and tail separately: High probability
guarantees for DPSGD with heavy tails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17529, 2024.
U. Simsekli, L. Sagun, and M. Gurbuzbalaban. A tail-index analysis of stochastic gradient noise
in deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5827–5837.
PMLR, 2019.
H. Tran and A. Cutkosky.
Better SGD using Second-order Momentum.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.03265, 2021.
N. Tripuraneni, M. Stern, C. Jin, J. Regier, and M. I. Jordan. Stochastic cubic regularization for fast
nonconvex optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
H. Wang, M. Gurbuzbalaban, L. Zhu, U. Simsekli, and M. A. Erdogdu. Convergence Rates of
Stochastic Gradient Descent under Infinite Noise Variance. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 18866–18877, 2021.
J. Yang, X. Li, I. Fatkhullin, and N. He. Two sides of one coin: the limits of untuned sgd and the
power of adaptive methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:74257–74288,
2023.
J. Zhang and A. Cutkosky. Parameter-free regret in high probability with heavy tails. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8000–8012, 2022.
J. Zhang, S. P. Karimireddy, A. Veit, S. Kim, S. Reddi, S. Kumar, and S. Sra. Why are adaptive
methods good for attention models? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
15383–15393, 2020.
13

--- Page 14 ---
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
1. Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
paper’s contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: yes, we derive new sample complexity upper and lower bounds, the formal
proofs are in the appendix
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
made in the paper.
• The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
• The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
• It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
are not attained by the paper.
2. Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: yes, there is limitations sections in the end of main part
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
• The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
implications would be.
• The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
• The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
technical jargon.
• The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
and how they scale with dataset size.
• If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
address problems of privacy and fairness.
• While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory assumptions and proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
a complete (and correct) proof?
Answer: [Yes]
14

--- Page 15 ---
Justification: Yes, all formals proofs are in the appendix, assumptions are clearly stated.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
• All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
referenced.
• All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
• The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
proof sketch to provide intuition.
• Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Yes, we describe the details of our experiments, although our experiments use
very simple toy illustration.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
whether the code and data are provided or not.
• If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
• Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
appropriate to the research performed.
• While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
nature of the contribution. For example
(a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
to reproduce that algorithm.
(b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
the architecture clearly and fully.
(c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
the dataset).
(d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
material?
15

--- Page 16 ---
Answer: [NA]
Justification: Our work’s focus is advancing theory of stochastic optimization, so this
question is not applicable. Our one numerical illustration is a very toy experiment involving
10 dimensional quadratic problem with synthetic heavy-tailed noise.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
• Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
benchmark).
• The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
//nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
• The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
• At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
versions (if applicable).
• Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Yes, we provide all necessary information to reproduce our toy illustration.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
• The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Yes, we include error bars as it is important to illustrate the confidence levels
of optimization algorithms.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
the main claims of the paper.
• The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
run with given experimental conditions).
• The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
16

--- Page 17 ---
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
• It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
of the mean.
• It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
of Normality of errors is not verified.
• For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
error rates).
• If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments compute resources
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
the experiments?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The illustration is toy and can be run on any device without advanced compute
resources.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
• The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
• The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
didn’t make it into the paper).
9. Code of ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Yes, we follow the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
• If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
deviation from the Code of Ethics.
• The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
societal impacts of the work performed?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: Our work advances theory of optimization, it has not immediate societal
impact.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
• If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
• Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
(e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
(e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
17

--- Page 18 ---
• The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
models that generate Deepfakes faster.
• The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
• If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: There are no such risks.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
• Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
• Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
• We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: We don’t use existing assets.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
• For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
• If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
• For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
18

--- Page 19 ---
• If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13. New assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: We don’t release new assets.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
• Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
• The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
• At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: we don’t use crowdsoucing.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
• According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
subjects
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: the work does not involve crowdsourcing.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
• We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
19

--- Page 20 ---
Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology,
scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
Answer: [NA]
Justification: We don’t use LLM for method development.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
• Please refer to our LLM policy (https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
for what should or should not be described.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Notations and Assumptions
4
3
Lower Complexity Bounds for SOSO under p-BCM
4
4
Near-optimal Second-Order Method under p-BCM
6
5
Hessian Clipping for High-probability Convergence
8
6
Limitations and Future Work
10
A Additional Related Work
22
B About Normalized SGD and Different Variants of Momentum
22
C Technical Lemmas
24
D Missing Proofs for Section 3
25
E
Missing Proofs for Section 4
28
F
Missing Proofs for Section 5
33
F.1
Analysis: Optimization Part . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
F.2
Analysis: Statistical Part
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
G Experimental Results
44
21

--- Page 22 ---
Table 1: Summary of sample complexities of stochastic second-order (SOSO) methods for finding
an ε-stationary point, in high probability of in expectation, i.e., number of stochastic gradient and
Hessian evaluations to find ¯x with ∥∇F(¯x)∥≤ε. The column “p” indicates the range of moments
in Assumptions 3, 4 for which the result holds, that is when p = 2, the corresponding result holds
only under bounded variance. When p = ∞it means that at least for stochastic gradient or stochastic
Hessian bounded noise assumption is required, which corresponds to all moments being bounded.
We are not aware of any prior works for SOSO for p < 2. The column “HP?” denotes whether the
high probability guarantee with polylogarithmic dependence on the inverse of failure probability 1/δ
is available.
Algorithm
Sample Complexity
p
HP?
SCN
[Tripuraneni et al., 2018]
∆√Lhσ2
ε7/2
∞
✓(1)
SGD with HVP-RVR
[Arjevani et al., 2020]
∆σσh
ε3
+ ∆√Lhσ1
ε5/2
+ ∆L
ε2
2
✗
SN(2) with HVP-RVR
[Arjevani et al., 2020]
∆σσh
ε3
+ ∆√Lhσ1
ε5/2
+ ∆σh
ε2
2
✗
N-SGDHess
[Tran and Cutkosky, 2021]
σ3
ε3 + ∆σσh
ε3
+ ∆√Lhσ1
ε5/2
+ ∆σh
ε2
2
✗
SCN with IT-HB
[Chayti et al., 2024]
∆√Lh
ε3/2
+ ∆L
1/4
h
σ
1/2
h
ε7/4
+ ∆
√
Lσ2
ε7/2
∞
✗
Lower Bounds
Theorem 1
min
n
∆σh
ε2 , ∆Lσ
ε3 , ∆√Lhσ
ε5/2
o   σ
ε

1
p−1
(1, 2]
NSGDMHess
Theorem 2
∆(L+σh)
ε2
+

∆(L+σh)
ε2
+ σ
ε
   σ
ε

1
p−1
(1, 2]
✗
Clip NSGDMHess
Theorem 3
√
∆1(L+σh)+σ
ε
2+
1
p−1
(1, 2]
✓
(1) Tripuraneni et al. [2018] provide analysis under stronger assumptions, which implies the noise has light tails.
(2) SN = Subsampled Newton.
A
Additional Related Work
Gradient clipping and normalization.
Gradient clipping has been applied successfully also in
zero-order optimization [Kornilov et al., 2024], bandit and RL literature [Bubeck et al., 2013, Cayci
and Eryilmaz, 2024], online learning [Zhang and Cutkosky, 2022] and differential privacy [Abadi
et al., 2016, Sha et al., 2024]. Some other works, which use normalization and gradient clipping
under heavy-tailed noise include [Armacki et al., 2023, Puchkin et al., 2024, Liu and Zhou, 2024].
B
About Normalized SGD and Different Variants of Momentum
In this section, we present a general framework for momentum-based methods. The study of momen-
tum has a long history, particularly in convex optimization, where Nesterov [1983] demonstrated that
an appropriate use of momentum in gradient descent can accelerate convergence. In contrast, our
focus is on momentum in the setting of stochastic non-convex optimization. The general update rule
is given by
xt+1 = xt −γt
gt
∥gt∥,
where gt denotes the momentum term. Different choices of gt give rise to different algorithms, several
of which we now describe.
NSGD is the standard stochastic gradient method. Setting gt = ∇f(xt, ξt) in the general framework
immediately recovers NSGD. It is well known that NSGD converges only to a neighborhood of the
solution, with radius proportional to σ [Yang et al., 2023, Hübler et al., 2025]. One possible remedy
is to employ mini-batching, which reduces the variance. However, this strategy cannot be applied if
only a single sample per iteration is allowed.
22

--- Page 23 ---
NSGDM is the solution of the problem described above and was proposed and analyzed by Cutkosky
and Mehta [2020]. The momentum term is defined as
gt = (1 −α)gt−1 + α∇f(xt, ξt).
In their work, the authors proved that NSGDM converges to an ε-stationary point and achieves a
sample complexity of O(ε−4), which is optimal according to the lower bound of Arjevani et al.
[2023]. Subsequently, Hübler et al. [2025] extended this result to the setting where the stochastic
gradients have bounded p-th moments, deriving a sample complexity of O(ε−3p−2
p−1 ).
NSGDM with clipping was proposed for the general setting where the stochastic gradients have
bounded p-th moments. The momentum term is modified as
gt = (1 −α)gt−1 + α, clip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ) .
Cutkosky and Mehta [2021] established high-probability convergence guarantees and showed that
this method achieves a sample complexity of O(ε−3p−2
p−1 ), which is optimal and matches the lower
bounds of Zhang et al. [2020]. It is worth noting that the clipping operator is not strictly necessary:
normalization of the momentum term is sufficient to guarantee convergence under Assumption 3
[Hübler et al., 2025, Liu and Zhou, 2024].
NIGT is a variant of NSGD that incorporates momentum and implicit gradient transport, proposed
by Cutkosky and Mehta [2020]. In this method, the momentum term is modified by changing the
point at which the stochastic gradient is evaluated:
gt = (1 −α)gt−1 + α∇f(yt, ξt),
where yt = xt + 1 −α
α
xt−1.
Thanks to this modification, and under the assumption that the objective function has a Lipschitz
continuous Hessian, Cutkosky and Mehta [2020] proved that NIGT achieves a sample complexity of
O
 ε−7/2
, which improves upon that of NSGDM.
NIGT with clipping was introduced by Cutkosky and Mehta [2021] to enable high-probability
analysis under the assumption of bounded p-th moments of the stochastic gradients. The only
modification compared to standard NIGT is the inclusion of a clipping operator, which is required
from a theoretical standpoint. As shown in Cutkosky and Mehta [2021], NIGT with clipping achieves
a sample complexity of O

ε−5p−3
2p−2

, which is optimal according to Theorem 1.
NSGD with MVR is a variant of NSGD that incorporates momentum variance reduction (MVR).
The STORM/MVR method was proposed by Cutkosky and Orabona [2019] to improve the sample
complexity compared to standard SGD. More recently, He et al. [2025] established that NSGD with
MVR achieves a sample complexity of O

ε−2p−1
p−1

, which matches ours in terms of dependence on
ε (Theorem 2).
The methods discussed above rely solely on first-order information. A natural question is whether
incorporating second-order information can further improve the sample complexity.
NSGD-Hess is a variant of Normalized SGD that incorporates Hessian-corrected momentum, pro-
posed by Tran and Cutkosky [2021]. In this method, a stochastic Hessian-vector product is introduced
into the momentum update:
gt = (1 −α)
 gt−1 + ∇2f(xt, ξt) · (xt −xt−1)

+ α∇f(yt, ξt).
Refined NSGD-Hess. In our refined version, the momentum term is modified by adjusting the point
at which the stochastic Hessian is evaluated and by using an independent fresh sample ˆξt ∼D for the
Hessian-vector product computation:
ˆxt
=
qtxt + (1 −qt)xt−1,
where qt ∼U([0, 1]),
gt
=
(1 −α)

gt−1 + ∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt) · (xt −xt−1)

+ α∇f(xt, ξt).
23

--- Page 24 ---
C
Technical Lemmas
We list the following technical lemmas, which are useful for our analysis in the subsequent sections.
Lemma 1 (Lemma 10 from Hübler et al. [2025]). Let p ∈[1; 2], and X1, . . . , Xn ∈Rd be a
martingale difference sequence, i.e. E [Xj|Xj−1, . . . , X1] = 0 a.s. for all j = 1, . . . , n satisfying
E [∥Xj∥p] < ∞
for all i = 1, . . . , n.
Define Sn
def
= Pn
j=1 Xj, then
E [∥Sn∥p] ≤2
n
X
i=j
E [∥Xj∥p] .
Lemma 2 (Lemma 10 from Cutkosky and Mehta [2021]). Let X1, . . . , Xn ∈Rd be a sequence of
random vectors. Define the sequence of real numbers w1, . . . , wn recursively
1. w0 = 0
2. If Pj−1
i=1 Xi ̸= 0, then we set:
wj = sign
 j−1
X
i=1
wi
! DPj−1
i=1 Xi, Xj
E

Pj−1
i=1 Xi

.
3. If Pj−1
i=1 Xi = 0, set wj = 0.
Then |wj| ≤∥Xj∥for all j = 1, . . . , n, and
∥Sn∥≤

n
X
j=1
wj

+
v
u
u
tmax
j∈[n] ∥Xj∥2 +
n
X
j=1
∥Xj∥2.
(8)
Lemma 3 (Bernstein inequality). Let X1, . . . , Xn ∈Rd be a martingale difference sequence,
i.e. E [Xj|Xj−1, . . . , X1] = 0 a.s. for all j = 1, . . . , n. Assume that conditional variances
σ2
j
def
= E

X2
j |Xj−1, . . . , X1

exist and are bounded, and assume that there exists deterministic
constant c > 0 such that |Xj| ≤c almost surely for all j = 1, . . . , n. Define Sn
def
= Pn
i=1 Xj, then
for all b > 0, G > 0
P


|Sn| > b and
n
X
j=1
σ2
i ≤G


≤2 exp

−
b2
2G + 2cb/3

,
(9)
Lemma 4 ( Lemma 5.1 from Sadiev et al. [2023]). Let λ > 0 and X ∈Rd be a random vector and
e
X
def
= clip (X, λ). Then,
 e
X −E
h
e
X
i ≤2λ. Moreover, if for some σ ≥0 and p ∈(1; 2] we have
E [X] = x ∈Rd, E [∥X −x∥p] ≤σp, and ∥x∥≤λ/2, then
E
h
e
X
i
−x
 ≤2pσp
λp−1 ,
E
 e
X −x

2
≤18λ2−pσp,
E
 e
X −E
h
e
X
i
2
≤18λ2−pσp.
24

--- Page 25 ---
D
Missing Proofs for Section 3
In this section we provide lower bounds for the certain class of functions and the oracle class. Our
prove is inspired by the paper of Arjevani et al. [2020].
Auxiliary Lemmas. Now we state two helpful lemmas to prove lower bound. The first lemma is
about the number of iteration to reveal all coordinates, when zero-respecting algorithms use the
information received from the oracle forming probability-ρ zero-chain.
Definition 2. A collection of derivative estimators ∇1f(x, ξ), ∇2f(x, ξ), . . . , ∇qf(x, ξ) for a
function F forms a probability-ρ zero-chain if
P
n
∃x | prog
 ∇1f(x, ξ), . . . , ∇qf(x, ξ)

= prog 1
4 (x) + 1
o
≤ρ
and
P
n
∃x | prog
 ∇1f(x, ξ), . . . , ∇qf(x, ξ)

= prog 1
4 (x) + i
o
= 0, i > 1.
The second lemma is about the main properties of the worst function from the class F(∆, L1:q).
Lemma 5 ([Arjevani et al., 2020]). Let ∇1f(x, ξ), . . . , ∇qf(x, ξ) be a collection of probability-
ρ zero-chain derivative estimators for F : RT →R, and let Oq
F be an oracle with Op
f =
(∇rf(x, ξ))r∈[q]. Let {x(t)
A[Oq
F ]} be a sequence of queries produced by a zero-respecting algorithm A
interacting with Oq
F . Then, with probability at least 1 −δ
prog

x(t)
A[Oq
F]

< T,
for all
t ≤T −log 1
δ
2ρ
.
Lemma 6 (Carmon et al. [2020]). Let h : RT →R be the following function:
h(x) = −Ψ(1)Φ(x1) +
T
X
i=2
(Ψ(−xi−1)Φ(−xi) −Ψ(xi−1)Φ(xi)) ,
where
Ψ(x) =
(
0,
x ≤1
2;
exp

1 −
1
(2x−1)2

,
x > 1
2,
and
Φ(x) = √e
x
Z
−∞
e−1
2 t2dt.
Then the function h satisfies the following properties:
• h(0) −inf
x h(x) ≤∆0T, where ∆0 = 12.
• For q ≥1, the q-th order derivatives of h are ℓq-Lipschitz continuous, where ℓq ≤
exp
  5
2q log q + cq

for a numerical constant c < ∞.
• For all x ∈RT , q ∈N and i ∈[T], we have ∥∇q
i h(x)∥op ≤ℓq−1, where ℓ0 = 23.
• For all x ∈RT and q ∈N, prog (∇qh(x)) ≤prog 1
2 (x) + 1.
• For all x ∈RT , if prog1(x) < T, then ∥∇h(x)∥≥|∇prog1(x)+1h(x)| > 1.
Lemma 7. Let the derivative estimator is defined as follows for each r ∈[q]
[∇rh(x, ξ)]i
def
=

1 + I
n
i > prog 1
4 (x)
o ξ
ρ −1

· ∇r
i h(x),
where ξ ∼Bernoulli(ρ). Then, {∇rh(x, ξ)}r∈[q] forms probability-ρ zero-chain, and for any
p ∈[1, 2] and for each r ∈[q] the derivative estimator satisfies
E [∇rh(x, z)] = ∇rh(x),
and
E
h
∥∇rh(x, ξ) −∇rh(x)∥p
op
i
≤2ℓp
r−1
ρp−1
for all x ∈Rd.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Proof. First of all, it is easy to show that the proposed estimator is unbiased, i.e.
E [∇rh(x, ξ)] = (1 + 0) · ∇rh(x) = ∇rh(x).
According to Lemma 6, we have prog (∇rh(x)) < prog 1
2 (x) + 1 ≤prog 1
4 (x) + 1, where the last
inequality is true because progα is non-increasing with respect to α. Then, by Lemma 6 we have
[∇rh(x, ξ)]i = ∇r
i h(x) = 0,
∀i > prog 1
4 (x) + 1.
Therefore, due to that ξ ∼Bernoulli(ρ) we obtain
P
n
∃x | prog
 ∇1f(x, z), . . . , ∇qf(x, z)

= prog 1
4 (x) + 1
o
≤ρ,
i.e. {∇rh(x, ξ)}r∈[q] forms probability-ρ zero-chain.
Now we bound p-th moment of ∇rh(x, ξ)−∇rh(x) for any p ∈[1; 2]. Denoting ix = prog 1
4 (x)+1,
for any r ∈[q] we have
E
h
∥∇rh(x, ξ) −∇rh(x)∥p
op
i
=
E
I
n
ix > prog 1
4 (x)
o ξ
ρ −1

p
∥∇r
i h(x)∥p
op

=
E

ξ
ρ −1

p
∥∇r
i h(x)∥p
op
≤
ℓp
r−1E

ξ
ρ −1

p
=
ℓp
r−1
(1 −ρ)pρ + (1 −ρ)ρp
ρp
≤
ℓp
r−1
2
ρp−1 .
Main Theorem. Now we are ready to state and prove the main theorem in this section, i.e. Theorem 1.
Proof. First of all, we fix all parameters: q ∈N, ∆, L1:q, σ1:q > 0 and ε > 0. Next, we rescale our
function h as follows: h⋆(x) = νh(βx), where ν > 0 and β > 0. According to Lemma 6, selecting
T =
j
∆
ν∆0
k
, we have for any r ∈[q −1]
h⋆(0) −inf
x h⋆(x)
=
ν

h⋆(0) −inf
x h⋆(βx)

≤ν∆0T ≤∆;
∥∇r+1h⋆(x)∥op
=
νβr+1∥∇r+1h(βx)∥≤νβr+1ℓr;
∥∇h⋆(x)∥
=
νβ∥∇h(βx)∥≥νβ∥∇h(x)∥≥νβ, ∀x : prog1(x) < T.
Since {∇rh⋆(x, ξ) = νβr∇rh(βx, ξ)}r∈[p] forms a probability-ρ zero-chain, then by Lemma 6 with
probability at least δ = 1
2 we have
E
h∇h⋆(xt
A[Oq
h])

i
= νβE
h∇h⋆(βxt
A[Oq
h])

i
≥νβ
2 ,
∀t ≤T −1
2ρ
The p-th central moment of the scaled derivatives estimators is bounded as
E
h
∥∇rh⋆(x, ξ) −∇rh⋆(x)∥p
op
i
≤
νpβrpE
h
∥∇rh(βx, ξ) −∇rh(βx)∥p
op
i
≤
2νpβrpℓp
r−1
ρp−1
,
where in the last inequality we applied Lemma 7. Thus, we have the set of constraints for parameters
ν and β for all r ∈[q]:









ν∆0T ≤∆;
νβr+1ℓr ≤Lr;
νβ
2 ≥ε;
νpβprℓp
r−1
2
ρp−1 ≤σp
r.
26

--- Page 27 ---
We will resolve the system of inequalities step by step. The first step is to set ν = 2ε
β . For r = 1, we
have
νpβpℓp
0 ·
2
ρp−1 ≤σp
1
⇒
ρ = min
( ε
σ1

p
p−1
· 2
p+1
p−1 ℓ
p
p−1
0
, 1
)
.
To set β, we need to find its specific value, which can satisfy the following constraints: for any
r ∈{2, . . . , q} and any r′ ∈[q]
βr+1 ≤Lr
νℓr
= βLr
2εℓr
,
νpβprℓp
r−1
2
ρp−1
(∗)
≤βp(r−1)
σ1ℓr−1
ℓ0
p
≤σp
r,
where in the inequality (∗) we used
2
ρp−1 ≤
σp
1
νpβpℓp
0 . Therefore, we obtain
β =
min
r′∈[q]; r∈{2,...,q} min
( ℓ0σr
ℓr−1σ1

1
r−1
,
 Lr′
2εℓr′
 1
r′ )
.
Then, assuming T ≥3 and

ε
σ1

p
p−1 · 2
p+1
p−1 ℓ
p
p−1
0
≤1, we get
T −1
2ρ
=
1
2ρ
 ∆β
2∆0ε

−1

≥
∆β
8ρ∆0ε
≥
 σ1
2εℓ0

p
p−1
·
∆
4∆0ε
min
r′∈[q]; r∈{2,...,q} min
( ℓ0σr
ℓr−1σ1

1
r−1
,
 Lr′
2εℓr′
 1
r′ )
≥
Ω(1) · ∆
ε
σ1
ε

p
p−1 min
(
min
r∈{2,...,q}
σr
σ1

1
r−1
, min
r′∈[q]
Lr′
ε
 1
r′ )
.
Since h and h⋆are functions of T arguments, the dimension of the problem is equal to T. This
concludes the proof.
27

--- Page 28 ---
E
Missing Proofs for Section 4
In this section we study Normalized SGD with Hessian correction (NSGD-Hess) (see Algorithm 1).
Auxiliary Lemmas. To show the convergence guarantees for Algorithm 1, we state and prove
auxiliary lemmas. The first one is well-known Descent Lemma for Normalized SGD. The proof for
this lemma can be found in Cutkosky and Mehta [2020], Hübler et al. [2025], but for completeness we
restate and reprove it. The second one is devoted to the bounds on error term from Descent Lemma.
Lemma 8. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then for any selection of stepsize γ > 0 the iterates
{xt}T
t=0 generated by Algorithm 1 satisfy
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T ≤∆0 + 2γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥ˆet∥+ γ2LT
2
.
(10)
where functional gap is defined as ∆t
def
= F(xt) −F∗, error term is defined as ˆet
def
= gt −∇F(xt).
Proof. According to the update rule for xt and Assumption 2, we have
F(xt+1)
≤
F(xt) + ⟨∇F(xt), xt+1 −xt⟩+ L
2 ∥xt+1 −xt∥2
=
F(xt) −γ

∇F(xt), gt
∥gt∥

+ γ2L
2
=
F(xt) −γ∥gt∥−γ

∇F(xt) −gt, gt
∥gt∥

+ γ2L
2
≤
F(xt) −γ∥gt∥+ γ∥∇F(xt) −gt∥+ γ2L
2
≤
F(xt) −γ∥∇F(xt)∥+ 2γ∥∇F(xt) −gt∥+ γ2L
2 .
Using notation for the functional gap and the error term, we get
γ∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆t+1 ≤∆t + 2γ∥ˆet∥+ γ2L
2 .
Summing over t from 0 to T −1, we obtain
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T ≤∆0 + 2γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥ˆet∥+ γ2LT
2
.
(11)
Next, we derive the lemma for error control for the Hessian corrected momentum estimator (lines
4−7 in Algorithm 1). Similar lemma for the special case p = 2 appeared previously in [Salehkaleybar
et al., 2022, Fatkhullin et al., 2023]. For the case p < 2, similar recursion was derived by Hübler et al.
[2025] for first-order momentum. Now we extend this idea to the case of second-order momentum.
Lemma 9. Let Assumptions 2, 3 and 4 hold. Then for all t ≥0, we have
E [∥ˆet∥] ≤(1 −α)tE [∥ˆe0∥] + 2α
p−1
p σ + 12γ(L + σh)α−1/p,
(12)
where ˆet := gt −∇F(xt).
Proof. Define et = ∇f(xt, ξt) −∇F(xt), ˆSt+1 = ∇2f(ˆxt+1, ˆξt+1) · (xt+1 −xt) −∇F(xt+1) +
∇F(xt). We have E [et] = 0, E [∥et∥p] ≤σp, E
h
ˆSt
i
= 0, and
E
h ˆSt

pi
=
E
h∇F(xt) −∇F(xt+1) + ∇2f(ˆxt+1, ˆξt+1) · (xt+1 −xt)

pi
≤
3E [∥∇F(xt) −∇F(xt+1)∥p] + 3E
h∇2F(ˆxt+1) · (xt+1 −xt)
pi
+3E
h

∇2f(ˆxt+1, ˆξt+1) −∇2F(ˆxt+1)

· (xt+1 −xt)

pi
≤
6Lpγp + 3σp
hγp.
28

--- Page 29 ---
By the update rule for the gradient estimator:
ˆet
=
gt −∇F(xt) = (1 −α)ˆet−1 + αet + (1 −α) ˆSt.
Unrolling the recursion, we have
ˆet
=
(1 −α)tˆe0 + α
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j−1ej+1 +
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j ˆSj+1 .
Then, taking the norm and the total expectation, we get
E [∥ˆet∥] ≤(1−α)tE [∥ˆe0∥]+E



α
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j−1ej+1


+E



t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j ˆSj+1


. (13)
To continue the proof, we need to bound the last two terms from the previous inequality. By Jensen’s
inequality, we obtain
E



α
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j−1ej+1



≤

E



α
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j−1ej+1

p



1/p
(∗)
≤

2αp
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j−1)E [∥ej+1∥p]


1/p
(∗∗)
≤

2αp
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j−1)σp


1/p
(∗∗∗)
≤
2
 αp−1σp1/p = 2α
p−1
p σ,
(14)
where in (∗) we used Lemma 1, in (∗∗) we used E [∥ej+1∥p] ≤σpand in (∗∗∗) we used the
following inequality
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j−1) ≤
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j−1 ≤
∞
X
j=0
(1 −α)j = 1
α.
We bound the third term in the same way as we did for the second term:
E



t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j ˆSj+1



≤

E



α
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j ˆSj+1

p



1/p
(∗)
≤

2
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j)E
h ˆSj+1

pi


1/p
(∗∗)
≤

12
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j)γp(Lp + σp
h)


1/p
(∗∗∗)
≤
12
 α−1γp(Lp + σp
h))
1/p ≤12(L + σh)γα−1/p,
(15)
where in (∗) we used Lemma 1, in (∗∗) we used E
h ˆSj+1

pi
≤6Lpγp + 3σpγp, and in (∗∗∗) we
used the following inequality
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)p(t−j) ≤
t−1
X
j=0
(1 −α)t−j ≤
∞
X
j=0
(1 −α)j = α−1.
Plugging (14) and (15) into (13), we obtain
E [∥ˆet∥] ≤(1 −α)tE [∥ˆe0∥] + 2α
p−1
p σ + 12γ(L + σh)α−1/p,
which concludes the proof.
29

--- Page 30 ---
Main Theorem. Now we are ready to state and to prove the main convergence theorem for Algo-
rithm 1.
Theorem 4. Let Assumptions 1, 2, 3 and 4 hold, and stepsize γ =
q
∆α1/p
(L+σh)T , momentum parameter
α = min {1, αeff}, where αeff = max
  E0
T σ

p
2p−1 ,

∆(L+σh)
T σ2

p
2p−1 
. Then iterates {xt}T −1
t=0 of
Algorithm 1 satisfy
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥] = O
 r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1
+ E0
T + σ
 E0
Tσ
 p−1
2p−1 !
,
where E0 is defined as some upper bound on E [∥g0 −∇F(x0)∥]
Proof. Applying Lemma 9, we have
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥ˆet∥]
≤
T −1
X
t=0
(1 −α)tE [∥ˆe0∥] + 2α
p−1
p σT + 12γ(L + σh)α−1/pT
≤
E [∥ˆe0∥]
α
+ 2α
p−1
p σT + 12γ(L + σh)α−1/pT.
Therefore, according to Lemma 8, we obtain
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥]
≤
∆
γT + 2
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥ˆet∥] + γL
2
≤
∆
γT + γL
2 + 2E [∥ˆe0∥]
αT
+ 4α
p−1
p σ + 24γ(L + σh)α−1/p
≤
∆
γT + 2E [∥ˆe0∥]
αT
+ 4α
p−1
p σ + 25γ(L + σh)α−1/p
≤
O
 r
∆(L + σh)
α
1/pT
+ E [∥ˆe0∥]
αT
+ α
p−1
p σ
!
,
where in the last inequality we took γ =
q
∆α1/p
(L+σh)T . Denoting E [∥ˆe0∥] ≤E0 and taking momentum
parameter α = min {1, αeff}, where αeff = max
  E0
T σ

p
2p−1 ,

∆(L+σh)
T σ2

p
2p−1 
, we have
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥]
=
O
 r
∆(L + σh)
α
1/pT
+ E0
αT + α
p−1
p σ
!
=
O
 r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ E0
T + σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1
+ σ
 E0
Tσ
 p−1
2p−1 !
.
Now we investigate how different choices of initial estimator g0 affect the total sample complexity
bound.
Corollary 2. Let all assumptions of Theorem 4 hold and the step-size and momentum parameters are
set according to this theorem statement.
1. If we set g0 = ∇F(x0), then E0 = 0, and the total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is
equal to
O
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
30

--- Page 31 ---
2. If we set g0 = 0, then E0 =
√
2∆L, and the total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is equal
to
O
 
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
√
∆Lσ
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1
!
.
3. If we set g0 =
1
Binit
PBinit
j=1 ∇f(x0, ξ0,j) with Binit = max
n
1,
  σ
ε

p
p−1 ,
  σ
ε

p
2p−1 o
, then
E0 = 2σ/B
p−1
p
init , and the total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is equal to
O
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 + σ
ε
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
σ
ε

p
2p−1 
.
Proof. The first case is ideal, when we can have access to the full gradient but once: set g0 = ∇F(x0),
then ˆe0 = 0 and E0 = 0. Thus we have
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥]
=
O
 r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1 !
.
In other words, we can guarantee 1
T
PT −1
t=0 E [∥∇F(xt)∥] ≤ε after
O
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 
.
iterations of Algorithm 1.
The second case is that we select g0 as a zero vector. This choice implies that by smoothness of F,
we have
E [∥ˆe0∥] = ∥∇F(x0)∥≤
√
2L∆= E0.
Plugging the obtained value of E0 into the result of Theorem 2, we have
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥]
=
O


r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1
+
√
∆L
T
+ σ
 √
∆L
Tσ
! p−1
2p−1 

=
O


r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1
+ σ
 √
∆L
Tσ
! p−1
2p−1 

which implies that the total sample complexity is
O
 
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
√
∆Lσ
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1
!
.
The third case is that we set g0 =
1
Binit
PBinit
j=1 ∇f(x0, ξ0,j). By Lemma 1, we have
E [∥ˆe0∥]
≤
(E [∥ˆe0∥p])
1/p = (E [∥g0 −∇F(x0)∥p])
1/p
≤
2
Binit


Binit
X
j=0
E [∥∇f(x0, ξ0,j) −∇F(x0)∥p]


1/p
≤
2
Binit


Binit
X
j=0
σp


1/p
=
2σ
B
p−1
p
init
= E0.
Plugging the obtained value of E0 into the result of Theorem 2, we have
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E [∥∇F(xt)∥]
=
O



r
∆(L + σh)
T
+ σ
∆(L + σh)
Tσ2
 p−1
2p−1
+
σ
TB
p−1
p
init
+ σ


1
TB
p−1
p
init


p−1
2p−1 

,
31

--- Page 32 ---
from which we have that the total sample complexity is
O

∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
σ2
B
p−1
p
init ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
σ
εB
p−1
p
init
+ Binit

.
Taking Binit = max
n
1,
  σ
ε

p
p−1 ,
  σ
ε

p
2p−1 o
, we have that the total sample complexity is
O
∆(L + σh)
ε2
+ ∆(L + σh)
ε2
σ
ε

1
p−1 + σ
ε
σ
ε

1
p−1 +
σ
ε

p
2p−1 
.
32

--- Page 33 ---
F
Missing Proofs for Section 5
Now we start the high-probability convergence analysis for Algorithm 2. We divide our analysis into
two parts: Optimization part, where we prove descent lemma, and High-Probability part, where we
use concentration inequality to bound several terms from Descent Lemma. Finally, combining results
from both parts, we prove the main results of this section via induction. The idea is based on work of
Sadiev et al. [2023] and Liu et al. [2023b].
F.1
Analysis: Optimization Part
We start with Descent Lemma.
Lemma 10. Let Assumptions 1, 2 hold. Then Algorithm 2 with stepsize γ > 0 and momentum
parameter α ∈(0, 1) generates iterates {xt}T
t=0 satisfying the following inequality
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T
≤
∆1 + γ2LT
2
+ 3γ
α
p
L∆1
+2γα
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+ 2γ
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

,
for any j ∈[T −1] vectors θj and ωj are defined as follows
θj
def
=
clip (∇f(xj, ξj), λ) −∇F(xj),
(16)
ωj
def
=
clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), λh

−(∇F(xj) −∇F(xj−1)) .
(17)
Proof. First, we notice that Lemma 8 holds for Algorithm 2 and can be proven in the same way as
for Algorithm 1, since the gradient updates in the both methods are identical except for x1, and the
update rule for momentum term does not play any role in the proof of Lemma 8. Therefore, the
iterates {xt}T
t=0 of Algorithm 2 satisfy
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T ≤∆1 + 2γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥ˆet∥+ γ2LT
2
,
(18)
where ∆0 = ∆1, because x0 = x1. Next we bound ∥ˆet∥in almost the same way as we did in
Lemma 9. By update rule for momentum parameter, we have
ˆet
=
gt −∇F(xt)
=
(1 −α)

gt−1 + clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), λh

+αclip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ) −∇F(xt)
(16),(17)
=
(1 −α)ˆet−1 + αθt + (1 −α)ωt
=
(1 −α)tˆe0 + α
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj +
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj.
Taking the norm, we obtain the following bound
∥ˆet∥
≤
(1 −α)t∥ˆe0∥+ α

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤
(1 −α)tp
2L∆1 + α

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

,
(19)
where in the last inequality we used the following chain of inequalities
∥ˆe0∥= ∥g0 −∇F(x0)∥= ∥∇F(x0)∥= ∥∇F(x1)∥≤
p
2L(F(x1) −F∗) ≤
p
2L∆1.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Plugging (19) into (18), we acquire
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T
≤
∆1 + 2γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥ˆet∥+ γ2LT
2
≤
∆1 + γ2LT
2
+ 2γ
T −1
X
t=0
(1 −α)tp
2L∆1
+2γα
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+ 2γ
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤
∆1 + γ2LT
2
+ 3γ
α
p
L∆1
+2γα
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+ 2γ
T −1
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

,
where in the last inequality we used
2γ
T −1
X
t=0
(1 −α)tp
2L∆1 ≤2γ
∞
X
t=0
(1 −α)tp
2L∆1 ≤
2
√
2γ
1 −(1 −α)
p
L∆1 ≤3γ
α
p
L∆1.
F.2
Analysis: Statistical Part
According to Lemma 10, we have two new terms

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

and

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

.
To bound both of them, we use the same idea as in the work of Gorbunov et al. [2020], Sadiev et al.
[2023], Liu et al. [2023b]: introduce unbiased and biased parts of θt and ωt, i.e. for any t ∈[T]
θt
=
θu
t + θb
t,
where
θu
t
def
=
clip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ) −Eξt [clip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ)] ,
(20)
θb
t
def
=
Eξt [clip (∇f(xt, ξt), λ)] −∇F(xt);
(21)
ωt
=
ωu
t + ωb
t,
where
ωu
t
def
=
clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), λh

−Eqt,ξt
h
clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), λh
i
,
(22)
ωb
t
def
=
Eqt,ξt
h
clip

∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1), λh
i
−(∇F(xj) −∇F(xj−1)) .
(23)
Under Assumption 3 for any λ ≥2∥∇F(xt)∥Lemma 4 implies
Eξt
hθu
j
2i
≤18λ2−pσp
and
θb
t
 ≤2pλ1−pσp,
for all t ∈[T].
(24)
It is worth to mention we have already shown in Lemma 8 that under Assumptions 2 and 4 the vector
ˆSt = ∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt) · (xt −xt−1) −∇F(xt) + ∇F(xt−1) has zero expectation Eqt,ξt
h
ˆSt
i
= 0, since
Eqt,ˆξt
h
∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)(xt −xt−1)
i
=
Eqt
h
Eˆξt
h
∇2f(ˆxt, ˆξt)
i
(xt −xt−1)
i
=
Eqt

∇2F(ˆxt)(xt −xt−1)

=
Z 1
0
∇2F(qxt + (1 −q)xt−1)(xt −xt−1)dq
=
∇F(xt) −∇F(xt−1).
34

--- Page 35 ---
The p-central moment of ˆSt is bounded, i.e. Eqt,ξt
h ˆSt

pi
≤6Lpγp + 3σp
hγp. Then, according to
Lemma 4, for all t ∈[T] we have
Eqt,ξt
hωu
j
2i
≤18λ2−p
h
γp(6Lp + 3σp
h)
and
ωb
t
 ≤2pλ1−p
h
γp(6Lp + 3σp
h),
(25)
for any 2 ∥∇F(xt) −∇F(xt−1)∥≤2Lγ ≤λh.
Lemma 11. Let Assumption 3 hold. For any δ′ ∈(0, 1/2] and any t ∈[T], if clipping level satisfy
λ ≥max
n
2∥∇F(xj)∥,
σ
α
1/p
o
,
then with probability at least 1 −2δ′

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

≤22λ log 2
δ′ .
Proof. We start with bounding
Pt
j=1(1 −α)t−jθj
.
Upper bound for

Pt
j=1(1 −α)t−jθj

By (20) and (21), we have

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

≤

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθb
j

|
{z
}
④
.
Denote Y t
j
def
=
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2 −Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
, and |Xt
j| ≤
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
 for any
j ∈[t]
V t
j
def
=

















0,
if j = 0;
sign
j−1
P
i=1
V t
i

*
j−1
P
i=1
(1−α)t−iθu
i ,(1−α)t−jθu
j
+

j−1
P
i=1
(1−α)t−iθu
i

,
if j ̸= 0 and
j−1
P
i=1
(1 −α)t−iθu
i ̸= 0;
0,
if j ̸= 0 and
j−1
P
i=1
(1 −α)t−iθu
i = 0.
Then to bound

tP
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
 we use Lemma 2 and obtain

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j

≤

t
X
j=1
V t
j

+
v
u
u
tmax
j∈[t]
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2 +
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2
≤

t
X
j=1
V t
j

+
v
u
u
t2
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2
≤

t
X
j=1
V t
j
| {z }
①
 +
 
2 ·
t
X
j=1
Y t
j
| {z }
②
+2 ·
t
X
j=1
Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
|
{z
}
③
!1/2
.
Upper bound for ①. The sequence Xt
1, . . . , Xt
t is martingale difference sequence, since, by definition
of θt
j and Xt
j, for all j ∈[t] we have E

Xt
j | Xt
j−1, . . . , Xt
1

= Eξj

Xt
j

= 0. Also, according to
Lemma 2, we have |Xt
j| ≤
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
 for all j ∈[t]. Using Lemma 4, we obtain that
|Xt
j| ≤
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
 ≤
θu
j
 ≤2λ,
where c1
def
= 2λ.
(26)
35

--- Page 36 ---
Denoting σ2
j
def
= E

(Xt
j)2 | Xt
j−1, . . . , Xt
1

= Eξj

(Xt
j)2
, Lemma 3 implies
P


|①| > b1 and
t
X
j=1
σ2
j ≤G1 log 2
δ′


≤2 exp
 
−
b2
1
2G1 log 2
δ′ + 2c1b1
3
!
= δ′,
where the last identity is true, if we set b1 =

1
3c1 +
q
1
9c1 + 2G1

log 2
δ′ . To define G1, we need
to bound Pt
j=1 σ2
j :
t
X
j=1
σ2
j
=
t
X
j=1
Eξj

(Xt
j)2
≤
t
X
j=1
Eξj

∥(1 −α)t−jθu
j ∥2
=
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j)Eξj

∥θu
j ∥2
(24)
≤
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j) · 18λ2−pσp ≤
18λ2−pσp
1 −(1 −α)2 ≤18λ2−pσp
α
= G1.
(27)
where we assumed ∥∇F(xj)∥≤λ
2 for any j ∈[t].
Upper bound for ②. The sequence Y t
1 , . . . , Y t
t forms a martingale difference sequence, since the
definition of Y t
j leads to E

Y t
j | Y t
j−1, . . . , Y t
1

= Eξj

Y t
j

= 0 for all j ∈[t] . Also, according to
Lemma 4, we obtain that
|Y t
j | ≤
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2 + Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
≤4λ2 + 4λ2 = 8λ2,
(28)
where we define c2
def
=
8λ2.
Denoting the conditional variance of Y t
j
as eσ2
j
def
=
E

(Y t
j )2 | Y t
j−1, . . . , Y t
1

= Eξj

(Y t
j )2
, we can bound eσ2
j easily
eσ2
j
(28)
≤
8λ2 · E
h
(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2 −Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
i
≤
16λ2Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
.
Then, Lemma 3 implies
P


|②| > b2 and
t
X
j=1
eσ2
j ≤G2 log 2
δ′


≤2 exp
 
−
b2
2
2G2 log 2
δ′ + 2c2b2
3
!
= δ′,
where the last identity is true, if we set b2 =

1
3c2 +
q
1
9c2 + 2G2

log 2
δ′ . To define G2, we need
to bound Pt
j=1 eσ2
j :
t
X
j=1
eσ2
j
≤
16λ2
t
X
j=1
Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i
=
16λ2
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j)Eξj
hθu
j
2i
(27)
≤
16λ2 · 18λ2−pσp
α
= 16 · 18λ4−pσp
α
= G2,
where we assumed ∥∇F(xj)∥≤λ
2 for any j ∈[t].
Upper bound for ③. Thanks to the proof of the bound on ③(see (27)), we have already shown what
we need: with probability 1
③=
t
X
j=1
Eξj
h(1 −α)t−jθu
j
2i (27)
≤18λ2−pσp
α
.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Upper bound on ④. Assuming ∥∇F(xj)∥≤λ
2 for any j ∈[t], with probability 1 we have
④=

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθb
j

≤
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j∥θb
j∥
(27)
≤4λ1−pσp
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j ≤4λ1−pσp
α
.
To sum up, we introduce event E①,t as follows
E①,t
def
=


|①| ≤b1 or
t
X
j=1
σ2
j > G1 log 2
δ′


,
(29)
where c1 = 2λ, G1 =
18λ2−pσp
α
, b1 =

1
3c1 +
q
1
9c2
1 + 2G1

log 2
δ′ .
We have shown that
P {E①,t} ≥1 −δ′. The bound on b1
b1
=
 
1
3c1 +
r
1
9c2
1 + 2G1
!
log 2
δ′ ≤
2
3c1 +
p
2G1

log 2
δ′
=
 
4
3λ +
r
36λ2−pσp
α
!
log 2
δ′ = λ
 
4
3 + 6
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ .
Also we define event E②,t as follows
E②,t =


|②| ≤b2 or
t
X
j=1
eσ2
j > G2 log 2
δ′


,
(30)
where c2 = 8λ2, G2 =
16·18λ4−pσp
α
, b2 =

1
3c2 +
q
1
9c2
2 + 2G2

log 2
δ′ . We have shown that
P {E②,t} ≥1 −δ′. We adjust the bound on b2:
b2
=
 
1
3c2 +
r
1
9c2
2 + 2G2
!
log 2
δ′ ≤
2
3c2 +
p
2G2

log 2
δ′
=
 
16
3 λ2 +
r
16 · 36λ4−pσp
α
!
log 2
δ′ = λ2
 
16
3 + 24
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ .
Thus, the event E①,t ∩E②,t implies

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

≤

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθu
j

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθb
j

≤
|①| +
√
2 · ②+ 2 · ③+ ④
≤
λ
 
4
3 + 6
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ + 4λ · 1
α
σ
λ
p
+
v
u
u
t2λ2
 
16
3 + 24
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ + 36λ2−pσp
α
.
Taking λ ≥
σ
α1/p , we have the event E①,t ∩E②,t implies

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

≤
λ
 
4
3 + 6 + 4 +
r
32
3 + 84
!
log 2
δ′ ≤22λ log 2
δ′ .
This concludes the proof.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Lemma 12. Let Assumptions 2and 4 hold. For any δ′′ ∈(0, 1/2] and any t ∈[T], if clipping level
satisfy
λh ≥max

2γL, γ(L + σh)
α
1/p

,
and with probability at least 1 −2δ′′

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤59λh log 2
δ′′ .
Proof. By (22) and (23), we have

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωb
j

|
{z
}
⑧
.
(31)
Denote Zt
j
def
=
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2−Eqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
, and |W t
j | ≤
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j

for any j ∈[t]
W t
j
def
=

















0,
if j = 0;
sign
j−1
P
i=1
W t
i

*
j−1
P
i=1
(1−α)t−i+1ωu
i ,(1−α)t−j+1ωu
j
+

j−1
P
i=1
(1−α)t−i+1ωu
i

,
if j ̸= 0 and
j−1
P
i=1
(1 −α)t−i+1ωu
i ̸= 0;
0,
if j ̸= 0 and
j−1
P
i=1
(1 −α)t−i+1ωu
i = 0.
Then to bound

tP
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
 we use Lemma 2 and obtain

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jωu
j

≤

t
X
j=1
W t
j

+
v
u
u
tmax
j∈[t]
(1 −α)t−jωu
j
2 +
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jωu
j
2
≤

t
X
j=1
W t
j

+
v
u
u
t2
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2
≤

t
X
j=1
W t
j
| {z }
⑤
 +
 
2 ·
t
X
j=1
Zt
j
| {z }
⑥
+2 ·
t
X
j=1
Eqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
|
{z
}
⑦
!1/2
.
Upper bound for ⑤. The sequence W t
1, . . . , W t
t is martingale difference sequence, since, by
definition of ωt
j and W t
j , for all j ∈[t] we have E

W t
j | W t
j−1, . . . , W t
1

= Eqj,ξj

W t
j

= 0. Also,
according to Lemma 2, we have |W t
j | ≤
(1 −α)t−jωu
j
 for all j ∈[t]. Using Lemma 4, we obtain
that
|W t
j | ≤
(1 −α)t−jωu
j
 ≤
ωu
j
 ≤2λh,
where c3
def
= 2λh.
(32)
Denoting σ2
j
def
= E

(W t
j )2 | W t
j−1, . . . , W t
1

= Eξj

(W t
j )2
, Lemma 3 implies
P


|⑤| > b3 and
t
X
j=1
¯σ2
j ≤G3 log 2
δ′′


≤2 exp
 
−
b2
3
2G3 log 2
δ′′ + 2c3b3
3
!
= δ′′,
38

--- Page 39 ---
where the last identity is true, if we set b3 =

1
3c3 +
q
1
9c3 + 2G3

log 2
δ′′ . To define G3, we need
to bound Pt
j=1 ¯σ2
j :
t
X
j=1
¯σ2
j
=
t
X
j=1
Eqj,ξj

(W t
j )2 (32)
≤
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j+1)Eqj,ξj

∥ωu
j ∥2
(25)
≤
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j+1) · 18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp ≤18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h)γp
1 −(1 −α)2
=
18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α(2 −α)
≤18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α
= G3.
(33)
Upper bound for ⑥. The sequence Zt
1, . . . , Zt
t forms a martingale difference sequence, since the
definition of Zt
j leads to E

Zt
j | Zt
j−1, . . . , Zt
1

= Eqj,ξj

Zt
j

= 0 for all j ∈[t] . Also, according
to Lemma 4, we obtain that
|Zt
j| ≤
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2 + Eqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
≤4λ2
h + 4λ2
h = 8λ2
h,
(34)
where we define c4
def
=
8λ2
h.
Denoting the conditional variance of Zt
j as bσ2
j
def
=
E

(Zt
j)2 | Zt
j−1, . . . , Zt
1

= Eqj,ξj

(Zt
j)2
, we can bound bσ2
j easily
bσ2
j
(34)
≤
8λ2
h · Eqj,ξj
h
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2 −Eqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
i
≤
16λ2
hEqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
.
(35)
Then, Lemma 3 implies
P


|⑥| > b4 and
t
X
j=1
bσ2
j ≤G4 log 2
δ′


≤2 exp
 
−
b2
4
2G4 log 2
δ′ + 2c4b4
3
!
= δ′′,
where the last identity is true, if we set b4 =

1
3c4 +
q
1
9c4 + 2G4

log 2
δ′′ . To define G4, we need
to bound Pt
j=1 bσ2
j :
t
X
j=1
bσ2
j
(35)
≤
16λ2
h
t
X
j=1
Eqj,ξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i
= 16λ2
h
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)2(t−j+1)Eqj,ξj
hωu
j
2i
≤
16λ2
h · 18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α
= 16 · 18λ4−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h)γp
α
= G4.
Upper bound for ⑦. Thanks to the proof of the bound on ④(see (33)), we have already shown what
we need: with probability 1
⑦=
t
X
j=1
Eξj
h(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j
2i (33)
≤18λ2−p(6Lp + 3σp)γp
α
.
Upper bound on ⑧. By definition of ωb
j, with probability 1 we have
⑧
(31)
=

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωb
j

≤
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1∥ωb
j∥
(25)
≤
4λ1−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1 ≤4λ1−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α
.
39

--- Page 40 ---
To sum up, we introduce event E⑤,t as follows
E⑤,t =


|⑤| ≤b3 or
t
X
j=1
¯σ2
j > G3 log 2
δ′′


,
(36)
where c3 = 2λh, G3 =
18λ2−p
h
(6Lp+3σp
h)γp
α
, b3 =

1
3c3 +
q
1
9c2
3 + 2G3

log 2
δ′′ . We have shown
that P {E⑤,t} ≥1 −δ′′. We adjust the bound on b3:
b3
=
 
1
3c3 +
r
1
9c2
3 + 2G3
!
log 2
δ′ ≤
2
3c3 +
p
2G3

log 2
δ′′
=

4
3λh +
s
36λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α

log 2
δ′′
=
λh
 
4
3 + 6
r
(6Lp + 3σp
h)γp
αλp
!
log 2
δ′′ .
Also we introduce event E⑥,t as follows
E⑥,t =


|⑥| ≤b4 or
t
X
j=1
bσ2
j > G4 log 2
δ′′


,
(37)
where c4 = 8λ2
h, G4 =
16·18λ4−p
h
(6Lp+3σp
h)γp
α
, b4 =

1
3c4 +
q
1
9c2
4 + 2G4

log 2
δ′′ . We have shown
that P {E⑥,t} ≥1 −δ′′. We adjust the bound on b4:
b4
=
 
1
3c4 +
r
1
9c2
4 + 2G4
!
log 2
δ′ ≤
2
3c4 +
p
2G4

log 2
δ′′
=

16
3 λ2
h +
s
16 · 36λ4−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α

log 2
δ′′
=
λ2
h
 
16
3 + 24
s
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
αλp
h
!
log 2
δ′′ .
Thus, the event E⑤,t ∩E⑥,t implies

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωu
j

+

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωb
j

≤
|⑤| +
√
2 · ⑥+ 2 · ⑦+ ⑧
≤
λh
 
4
3 + 6
s
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
αλp
h
!
log 2
δ′′ + 4λh · (6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
αλp
h
+
v
u
u
t2λ2
h
 
16
3 + 24
s
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
αλp
h
!
log 2
δ′′ + 36λ2
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h)
αλp
h
.
Assuming that λh ≥γ(L+σh)
α1/p
, we have the event E⑤,t ∩E⑥,t implies

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤
λh
 
4
3 + 6
√
6 + 24 +
r
32
3 + 48
√
6 + 216
!
log 2
δ′′
≤
59λh log 2
δ′′ .
40

--- Page 41 ---
Main Theorem
Now we are ready to state and prove the main results of this section: high-
probability convergence guarantees for Algorithm 2.
Theorem 5. Let Assumptions 1, 2, 3 and 4 hold, and ∆1 = ∆0 = F(x0) −F∗. Then if the
parameters of Algorithm 2: stepsize
γ ≤min
(
1
2
r
∆1
LT , α
12
r
∆1
L ,
1
1408αT log 8T
δ
r
∆1
L ,
∆1
352σα
p−1
p T log 8T
δ
,
s
∆1α1/p
968(L + σh)T log 8T
δ
)
,
(38)
momentum parameter and clipping levels
α =
1
T
p
2p−1 ,
λ = max
n
4
p
L∆1,
σ
α
1/p
o
,
λh = 2γ(L + σh)
α
1/p
(39)
for some T ≥1 and δ ∈(0, 1] such that log 8T
δ
≥1. Then after T iterations of Algorithm 2 the
iterates with probability at least 1 −δ satisfy
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥≤2∆1
γT .
(40)
Moreover, if we set (38) as identity, then the iterates generated by Algorithm 2 after T iterations with
probability at least 1 −δ satisfy
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥= O


max
np
∆1(L + σh), σ
o
T
p−1
2p−1
log T
δ

,
(41)
implying that to achieve 1
T
PT −1
t=0 ∥∇F(xt)∥≤ε with probability at least 1−δ Algorithm 2 requires
T = O






max
np
∆1(L + σh), σ
o
ε


2p−1
p−1
log
2p−1
p−1




1
δ


max
np
∆1(L + σh), σ
o
ε


2p−1
p−1







(42)
iterations/samples.
Proof. We remind in the proofs of Lemma 11 and Lemma 12 we have shown
E①,t
(29)
=


|①| ≤b1 or
t
X
j=1
σ2
j > G1 log 2
δ′


,
E②,t
(30)
=


|②| ≤b2 or
t
X
j=1
eσ2
j > G2 log 2
δ′


,
E⑤,t
(36)
=


|⑤| ≤b3 or
t
X
j=1
¯σ2
j > G3 log 2
δ′′


,
E⑥,t
(37)
=


|⑥| ≤b4 or
t
X
j=1
bσ2
j > G4 log 2
δ′′


,
where
c1 = 2λ, G1 = 18λ2−pσp
α
, b1 ≤λ
 
4
3 + 6
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ ,
c2 = 8λ2, G2 = 16 · 18λ4−pσp
α
, b2 ≤λ2
 
16
3 + 24
r
1
α
σ
λ
p
!
log 2
δ′ ,
c3 = 2λh, G3 = 18λ2−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α
, b3 ≤λh
 
4
3 + 6
r
(6Lp + 3σp
h)γp
αλp
!
log 2
δ′′ ,
c4 = 8λ2
h, G4 = 16 · 18λ4−p
h
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
α
, b4 ≤λ2
h
 
16
3 + 24
s
(6Lp + 3σp
h) γp
αλp
h
!
log 2
δ′′ .
Moreover, according to Lemma 11 and Lemma 12, we have
P {E①,t} ≥1 −δ′, P {E②,t} ≥1 −δ′, P {E⑤,t} ≥1 −δ′′, P {E⑥,t} ≥1 −δ′′.
41

--- Page 42 ---
The idea of the proof is based on technique form work of Gorbunov et al. [2020], Sadiev et al. [2023],
Liu et al. [2023b]: via mathematical induction we plan to show that for any τ ∈{0, 1, . . . , T −1}
the event
Gτ = Eτ ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩E4,τ
holds with probability at least 1 −τδ
T , where event Eτ is defined as
Eτ =
(
γ
t
X
s=0
∥∇F(xs)∥+ ∆t+1 ≤2∆1,
∀t ≤τ
)
,
and
E1,τ =
τ\
t=1
E①,t,
E2,τ =
τ\
t=1
E②,t,
E3,τ =
τ\
t=1
E⑤,t,
E4,τ =
τ\
t=1
E⑥,t.
Basis of induction. Obviously, we have G0 = E0 = {∆0 = ∆1 ≤2∆1} holds with probability
1 −τδ
T
τ=0
= 1.
Step of induction. Assume that the induction hypothesis is true for τ −1: P {Gτ−1} ≥1 −(τ−1)δ/T.
One needs to prove P {Gτ} ≥1 −τδ/T. We want to mention that
Eτ−1 ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩E4,τ = Gτ−1 ∩E①,τ ∩E②,τ ∩E⑤,τ ∩E⑥,τ.
Then, we have
P {Eτ−1 ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩E4,τ}
=
P {Gτ−1 ∩E①,τ ∩E②,τ ∩E⑤,τ ∩E⑥,τ}
=
1 −P

Gτ−1 ∩E①,τ ∩E②,τ ∩E⑤,τ ∩E⑥,τ
	
≥
1 −P

Gτ−1
	
−P

E①,τ
	
−P

E②,τ
	
−P

E⑤,τ
	
−P

E⑥,τ
	
≥
1 −(τ −1)δ
T
−2δ′ −2δ′′
=
1 −τδ
T +
 δ
T −2δ′ −2δ′′

=
1 −τδ
T ,
where we have selected δ′ = δ′′ =
δ
4T . The event Eτ−1 implies for any t ≤τ
∆t ≤γ
t−1
X
s=0
∥∇F(xs)∥+ ∆t ≤2∆1.
Therefore, we have ∥∇F(xt)∥≤√2L∆t ≤2√L∆1 ≤λ
2 . Assuming Eτ−1 ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩
E4,τ happens, Lemma 10 implies
γ
τ
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆τ+1
≤
∆1 + 3γ
α
p
L∆1 + γ2L(τ + 1)
2
+2γα
τ
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−jθj

+ 2γ
τ
X
t=1

t
X
j=1
(1 −α)t−j+1ωj

≤
∆1 + 3γ
α
p
L∆1 + γ2L(τ + 1)
2
+44γα(τ + 1)λ log 8T
δ + 118γ(τ + 1)λh log 8T
δ .
By setting clipping levels (39) and stepsize (38), we have
γ
τ
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆τ+1 ≤∆1 + ∆1
4 + ∆1
4 + ∆1
4 + ∆1
4 = 2∆1.
42

--- Page 43 ---
Therefore, we obtain
P {Gτ}
=
P {Eτ ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩E4,τ}
=
P {Eτ−1 ∩E1,τ ∩E2,τ ∩E3,τ ∩E4,τ}
≥
1 −τδ
T .
Thus, we have
P {ET } ≥P {GT } ≥1 −δ,
or equivalently with probability at least 1 −δ
γ
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥+ ∆T ≤2∆1
⇒
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥≤2∆1
γT .
Pugging (38) into the inequality above, we have
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
∥∇F(xt)∥≤2∆1
γT
= O

max



r
L∆1
T
,
√L∆1
αT
, α
p
L∆1 log T
δ , σα
p−1
p log T
δ ,
s
∆1(L + σh) log T
δ
Tα
1/p




.
Selecting α = 1/T −p/2p−1 (see (39)), we obtain
1
T
T
X
t=1
∥∇F(xt)∥
= O

max



r
L∆1
T
,
√L∆1
T
p−1
2p−1 ,
√L∆1
T
p−1
2p−1 log T
δ ,
σ
T
p−1
2p−1 log T
δ ,
s
∆1(L + σh) log T
δ
T
2p−2/2p−1





= O
 max
np
∆1(L + σh), σ
o
T
p−1
2p−1
log T
δ
!
.
Discussion. According to Theorem 3, the sample complexity of Algorithm 2 is
e
O






max
np
∆1(L + σh), σ
o
ε


2p−1
p−1



,
which has the same dependence on ε as lower bounds do (see Theorem 1). However, the obtained
upper bound has worst dependence on parameters L, σ, σh, ∆1 than lower bounds have. We suppose
that this caused by the analysis technique, since Algorithm 1 has better convergence rate in terms
of parameter dependence. This observation raises an interesting question: Is it possible to conduct
high-probability analysis for Algorithm 1, or equivalently, Algorithm 2 without clipping?
43

--- Page 44 ---
G
Experimental Results
We solve a simple quadratic problem, 1
2∥x∥2, in dimension d = 10 , with synthetic noise sampled
from a two-sided Pareto distribution. Recall that two-sided Pareto distribution with tail index ¯p
satisfies Assumption 3 assumption with p < ¯p. We consider different values of the tail index ¯p
ranging from 1.1 to 2.0. We start each algorithm from the same point sampled uniformly at random
from the standard normal distribution. Our empirical analysis consists of three experimental settings:
10
14
10
11
10
8
10
5
10
2
101
Clipping level, 
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Iteration
Clip NSGDHess
Figure 3: Effect of Hessian Clipping Level
λh = λ on the Iteration Complexity. The plot
shows the number of iterations required for Clip
NSGDHess to find a point with ∥∇F(x)∥≤3/2.
For extremely small and large values of λ, more
iterations are needed. The recommended value
for this task is λh = 10.
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Tail index, p
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Iteration
Clip NSGDHess
Clip NSGDM
Figure 4: Number of iterations needed for Clip
NSGDMHess and Clip NSGDM under Varying
Tail Index to find a point with ∥∇F(x)∥≤3/2
starting with the same initial point. The perfor-
mance of both algorithms decreases gradually
with the decrease of the tail index. The iteration
complexity of the second-order algorithm, Clip
NSGDMHess is uniformly better for all values
of p ∈[1.1, 2].
1. Effect of Clipping Level on Iteration Complexity.
We run Algorithm 2 (Clip NSGDHess) with
λh = λ until it reached the target accuracy ∥∇F(x)∥≤3/2. The stepsize and momentum parameters
are set to γ = 0.01 and α = 0.2. Clipping levels are varied from 10−16 to 103 in multiplicative
steps of 10. In Figure 3, we observe that intermediate clipping (λ = 10) yields the lowest iteration
complexity, also refer to Table 2 for precise numerical values. Extremely small or large values lead to
slower convergence. The proposed algorithm tolerates very small values of λ, but very large values
(e.g., λ > 103) result in very slow convergence. This empirically confirms the need for Hessian
clipping to stabilize convergence and achieve fast convergence.
Clipping Level, λ
10−16
10−8
100
102
103
Iterations
632
471
315
560
1506
Table 2: Iteration complexity depending on the clipping level λ = λh for Algorithm 2 (Clip
NSGDHess), cf. Figure 4.
2. Comparison with Clip NSGDM under Varying Tail Index.
We compare Clip NSGDHess
with Clip NSGDM (which was proposed in Cutkosky and Mehta [2021]). For Clip NSGDM, we
used the theoretical parameter choices: stepsize γ = T −2p−1
3p−2 and momentum α = T −
p
3p−2 . For
both methods we fixed T = 4000, λ = 0.5, and ¯λh = 0.05. These experiments were conducted to
complement Figure 1, which presents the theoretical iteration complexities. As shown in Figure 4,
the empirical results align with the theory: Clip NSGDHess consistently outperforms Clip NSGDM,
and the performance gap becomes larger as p increases. This provides strong empirical support for
our theoretical findings.
3. Sensitivity to Gradient Clipping for Fixed Hessian Clipping.
In this set of experiments, we
test Clip NSGDHess (Algorithm 2). Our goal is to study how iteration complexity depends on the
choice of the gradient clipping level λ when the Hessian clipping level is fixed. Specifically, we test
three different values of the Hessian clipping level, and vary the gradient clipping threshold λ:
44

--- Page 45 ---
• For ¯λh = 0.01: λ ranged from 10−4 to 102 (step 10).
• For ¯λh = 1.0: λ ranged from 10−2 to 104 (step 10).
• For ¯λh = 10: λ ranged from 100 to 106 (step 10).
The results are summarized in Figure 5.
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
Clipping level, 
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
Iterartion
=  0.01, 
=  0.1, 
h = 0.01
Clip NSGDHess
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
Clipping level, 
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
Iterartion
=  0.01, 
=  0.1, 
h = 1
Clip NSGDHess
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Clipping level, 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Iterartion
=  0.01, 
=  0.1, 
h = 100
Clip NSGDHess
Figure 5: Iteration complexity of Clip NSGDHess (Algorithm 2) depending on gradient clipping for
the three different fixed values of Hessian clipping ¯λh ∈{0.01, 1, 100}.
In all cases, the algorithm is tested until ∥∇F(x)∥≤1
2. We observe that intermediate values of
λ yield the best performance across all three regimes (small, medium, and large Hessian clipping
levels). As shown in Figure 5, both extremely small and extremely large values of λ lead to higher
iteration complexity, while moderate choices minimize it. The optimal values are:
λ = 1.0
for
¯λh = 0.01,
λ = 0.1
for
¯λh = 1.0,
λ = 10.0
for
¯λh = 100.0.
These findings confirm that moderate clipping levels are crucial for achieving the best performance
aligning with our theoretical findings in Theorem 3.
45