--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SLM-MUX: ORCHESTRATING SMALL LANGUAGE
MODELS FOR REASONING
Chenyu Wang1*†
Zishen Wan1,2*†
Hao Kang2
Emma Chen1
Zhiqiang Xie3
Tushar Krishna2
Vijay Janapa Reddi1
Yilun Du1
1Harvard University
2Georgia Institute of Technology
3Stanford University
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of language models, the number of small language
models (SLMs) has grown significantly. Although they do not achieve state-of-the-
art accuracy, they are more efficient and often excel at specific tasks. This raises
a natural question: can multiple SLMs be orchestrated into a system where each
contributes effectively, achieving higher accuracy than any individual model? Ex-
isting orchestration methods have primarily targeted frontier models (e.g., GPT-4)
and perform suboptimally when applied to SLMs. To address this gap, we propose
a three-stage approach for orchestrating SLMs. First, we introduce SLM-MUX,
a multi-model architecture that effectively coordinates multiple SLMs. Building
on this, we develop two optimization strategies: (i) a model selection search that
identifies the most complementary SLMs from a given pool, and (ii) test-time
scaling tailored to SLM-MUX. Our approach delivers strong results: Compared to
existing orchestration methods, our approach achieves up to 13.4% improvement on
MATH, 8.8% on GPQA, and 7.0% on GSM8K. With just two SLMs, SLM-MUX
outperforms Qwen 2.5 72B on GPQA and GSM8K, and matches its performance
on MATH. We further provide theoretical analyses to substantiate the advantages
of our method. Additional experiments show that the core principle of SLM-MUX
extends to open-ended generation tasks (e.g., HumanEval) and benefits other model
classes, including frontier LLMs and domain-specific fine-tuned SLMs. In sum-
mary, we demonstrate that SLMs can be effectively orchestrated into more accurate
and efficient systems through the proposed approach.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed a surge of small-sized language models (SLMs) containing billions
to tens of billions of parameters (Wang et al., 2024a; Javaheripi & Bubeck, 2023; Guo et al., 2025;
Allal et al., 2025). While these models may underperform state-of-the-art frontier language models,
which usually contain hundreds of billions to trillions of parameters, on any given query, they
offer substantially lower inference costs, are more affordable to train and fine-tune, and allow edge
deployment due to their small size (Belcak et al., 2025). Meanwhile, frontier models have reached
trillion-parameter scales where further increases in size and training data yield diminishing returns.
This mirrors a well-known challenge in computer architecture two decades ago: when enlarging
single CPU cores no longer delivered proportional performance gains, computer architects turned to
designing multi-core processors, where multiple smaller cores working together enabled sustained
improvements. This parallel suggests that combining multiple SLMs could offer a promising
alternative to scaling ever-larger frontier models.
Recent works have explored orchestrating multiple LLMs (e.g., GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o), combining
them into one system to process an input collaboratively. Representative approaches include Mixture-
of-Agent (Wang et al., 2024b), LLM-Debate (Du et al., 2023), and Multi-Agent Verification (Lifshitz
et al., 2025). These approaches share a key assumption: that models possess strong reasoning and
deliberation abilities, so that interaction through natural language can reliably correct mistakes.
However, when applied to SLMs, this assumption no longer holds. Our study finds that such
discussion-based orchestration often fails to improve performance for SLMs, and in some cases even
*Equal contribution.
†Correspondence to chenyu_wang@seas.harvard.edu, zishenwan@seas.harvard.edu.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
reduces accuracy by over 5%. Instead of correcting mistakes, SLMs tend to fall into groupthink
during interaction, amplifying errors rather than mitigating them. The assumptions that language
models can correct each other’s answers behind existing orchestration methods do not hold for
SLMs (Taubenfeld et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2025).
To address this issue, we propose SLM-MUX, a multi-model architecture for effectively orchestrating
SLMs while avoiding explicit text exchanges between models. Our key insight is that SLM-MUX
leverages complementary abilities from different models by selecting outputs based on confidence
scores without any model training.
50.0
52.5
55.0
57.5
60.0
62.5
Accuracy (%)
106
107
Token Usage
Llama
MoA
Debate
Llama-SC
Agent Forest
MAV
SLM-Mux (Ours)
Better
Figure 1: Head-to-Head Comparison of SLM-MUX
with Other Methods. SLM-MUX outperforms exist-
ing methods such as Self-Consistency (SC) (Wang et al.,
2023), Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) (Wang et al., 2024b),
LLM-Debate (Du et al., 2023), Multi-Agent Verification
(MAV) (Lifshitz et al., 2025), and Agent Forest (Li et al.,
2024). Results reported on MATH dataset with SLMs.
After introducing SLM-MUX, another question
arises: which models should be orchestrated to-
gether? Not all combinations are effective – if
one model is weaker across all dimensions, it
provides no benefit when paired with a stronger
one. In contrast, combining models with com-
plementary strengths (e.g., one stronger in alge-
bra, another in geometry) allows the system to
succeed where a single model would fail.
To address this, we develop a model selection
search strategy for SLM-MUX, which system-
atically evaluates and identifies model subsets
with complementary strengths. By maximizing
union accuracy while penalizing overconfident
contradictions, the search procedure finds the
most suitable models for a given model budget.
In addition, we explore compute scaling strate-
gies for the selected model ensembles to further enhance performance. By adjusting the number of
models and samples at inference time, we further boost performance and identify practical sweet
spots in the accuracy-compute tradeoff.
Our experiments demonstrate significant improvements across multiple benchmarks. By combining
only two SLMs, we achieve accuracy improvements of up to 6.7% on MATH, 5.7% on GPQA,
and 4.8% on GSM8K, compared to the best-performing single SLMs in the system. Our method
consistently outperforms existing discussion-based approaches for SLMs, with gains of up to 13.4%
on MATH, 8.8% on GPQA, and 7.0% on GSM8K. Most importantly, with just two SLMs, SLM-
MUX outperforms Qwen 2.5 72B on GPQA and GSM, and matches its performance on MATH.
Finally, we complement these empirical findings with theoretical and experimental analyses. Our
approach shows superiority in multiple scenarios compared with previous methods (Figure 1).
Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) We identify a fundamental limitation of existing
orchestration methods: Through systematic evaluation, we demonstrate that existing discussion-
based methods, which show consistent improvements for frontier LLMs, actually harm performance
when applied to SLMs. This counterintuitive finding challenges the assumption that orchestration
methods transfer across model scales and reveals the need for SLM-specific method. (ii) We propose
SLM-MUX, a novel multi-model architecture designed specifically for SLMs that avoids the error
amplification problems of discussion-based methods. SLM-MUX achieves consistent gains across
multiple benchmarks (MATH, GPQA, GSM8K) and significantly outperforms existing discussion-
based methods by large margins (up to 11.6% on MATH). (iii) We develop principled optimization
strategies for the SLM-MUX, including model selection search that identifies complementary model
selections and compute scaling strategies, further boosting performance while maintaining efficiency.
2
RELATED WORK
Discussion-based Orchestration Methods. We use discussion-based orchestration to refer to
orchestration schemes where multiple LM instances exchange or evaluate natural-language mes-
sages (Fu et al., 2025)—such as proposing answers, critiquing or debating, verifying from different
aspects, and finally aggregating into one output. Representative approaches include Mixture-of-
Agents (Wang et al., 2024b), which uses a dedicated LLM to aggregate outputs from several models;
LLM-Debate (Du et al., 2023), where models critique and refine each other’s reasoning; and Multi-
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Question
Proposer 1
Proposer 2
Debater 1
Debater 2
Debater 1
Debater 2
Best Answer
Question
Proposer 1
Proposer 2
Aspect 
Verifier 1
Best Answer
Aspect 
Verifier 2
Aspect 
Verifier 3
Aspect 
Verifier 4
Question
Proposer 1
Proposer 2
LLM Aggregator
Best Answer
Question
Proposer 1
Proposer 2
Non-LLM Protocol Aggregator
Best Answer
(a) Mixture-of-Agents Paradigm
(b) LLM-Debate Paradigm
(c) Multi-Agent Verification Paradigm
(d) SLM-Mux (Ours)
Figure 2: Comparing SLM-MUX (Ours) with Existing LLM Orchestration Methods. (a) Mixture-of-
Agents, (b) LLM-Debate, (c) Multi-Agent Verification, (d) SLM-MUX (Ours).
Agent Verification (Lifshitz et al., 2025), which assigns models to independently evaluate candidate
solutions before selecting the final answer. These methods assume that participating models have
sufficient reasoning ability to self-correct through interaction. Prior evaluations have been conducted
on frontier LLMs, while their effectiveness for SLMs remains unstudied.
Optimization for Multi-LM Orchestration. Given these orchestration methods, some works study
how to further improve their performance—e.g., how to select models to include, how to optimize
prompts, or how to adapt the architecture for specific tasks (Chen et al., 2023a; Ong et al., 2025; Chen
et al., 2024). Prompt and workflow optimization methods (Khattab et al., 2023; Opsahl-Ong et al.,
2024; Saad-Falcon et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a) generally assume strong instruction-following
ability, which makes them less effective for smaller models with limited such capabilities..
Another line of work is model selection for orchestration (Chen et al., 2025; Poon et al., 2025).
These methods often select models based on accuracy, assuming that combining models with higher
standalone accuracy will yield stronger orchestrations. However, most selection criteria are not end-
to-end: they evaluate models independently without directly assessing the performance of the overall
orchestration. This overlooks how models interact with each other—overconfident but incorrect
predictions from one model can dominate and suppress correct predictions from others, meaning that
the best standalone models may not yield the best orchestration.
Test-time Scaling Strategies. Test-time scaling methods improve performance by using additional
computation during inference without retraining (Snell et al., 2024; Muennighoff et al., 2025;
Zhang et al., 2025b). A common single-model approach is self-consistency (Trad & Chehab, 2025;
Thirukovalluru et al., 2024; Chow et al., 2024), which draws multiple samples from one model and
selects the majority answer; accuracy typically improves as the number of samples increases. Agent
Forest (Li et al., 2024) extends this idea to multiple models by collecting one output from each model
and applying majority voting across all answers.
3
METHODS
In this work, we set out to ask two critical questions: given a pool of available SLMs, how can we (i)
orchestrate their outputs to achieve the best overall performance, and (ii) select an effective subset of
models that maximizes accuracy?
To answer question (i), we present the SLM-MUX (Section 3.1), a simple yet effective orchestration
method. To answer question (ii), we propose model selection search (Section 3.2) that identifies
complementary subsets from dozens of available SLMs. Finally, we explore compute scaling
strategies (Section 3.3) to further enhance the reasoning accuracy during inference.
3.1
SLM-MUX FOR ORCHESTRATING MULTIPLE SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS
At a high level, our intuition is that we do not need to let SLMs discuss with each other. Instead,
we can develop a simple rule-based method that estimates the confidence of each model’s answer
and then selects the final output from the model with the highest confidence. We term our method
SLM-MUX, which operates in two phases.
Independent Generation Phase. For a given question, we first let each SLM independently generate
multiple candidate responses to the same query prompt with temperature > 0, producing a pool of
sampled answers per model.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SLM 1:
SLM 2:
SLM 3:
Output 1: … , the final answer is (A)
Output 2: … , the final answer is (A)
Output 3: … , therefor the correct 
                  answer is (B)
Output 1: … , the final answer is (A)
Output 2: … , the correct choice is (B)
Output 3: … , I think the best answer 
                  is (B)
Output 1: … , the final answer is (A)
Output 2: … , the correct choice is (B)
Output 3: … , I think the best answer 
                  is (C)
Confidence: 67%
Confidence: 67%
Confidence: 33%
Historical Accuracy: High
Historical Accuracy: Low
Historical Accuracy: Low
Question: Which of the following physical theories never requires regularization at high energies?
(A) Superstring Theory
(B) Classical Electrodynamics
(C) Quantum Electrodynamics (QED)
(D) Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)
Correct Answer: (A)
Independent Generation Phase
Reliability Estimation Phase
Figure 3: Illustration of SLM-MUX Workflow. (1) Each SLM first independently generates multiple outputs
for the same question. (2) The most frequent answer from each SLM is selected, and its frequency in the answer
pool is used as the confidence score. (3) The answers with the highest confidence score are selected. (4) If
multiple answers share the same confidence score, the tie is broken by selecting the answer from the SLM with
the highest accuracy on the validation set.
Algorithm 1 SLM-MUX Working Flow
Input: Models M1, . . . , Mn, query x, samples per model k, validation accuracies a1, . . . , an
Output: Final answer ˆy
Independent Generation: each model produces multiple candidate answers independently
1: for i = 1, . . . , n do
2:
Sample k answers Yi = {y(1)
i
, . . . , y(k)
i
} from Mi
3:
Compute fi(y) = 1
k
Pk
j=1 1

y(j)
i
= y

4:
Let y∗
i = arg maxy fi(y) and set si = fi(y∗
i )
Confidence Estimation: measure confidence and break ties by validation accuracy
5: Smax = maxi si,
I∗= { i | si = Smax }
6: if |I∗| = 1 then
7:
i∗←the unique index in I∗
8: else
9:
i∗←arg maxi∈I∗ai
10: return ˆy = y∗
i∗
Confidence Estimation Phase. We evaluate the confidence of each SLM’s outputs by measuring
their consistency across their own outputs. Intuitively, a model that places higher probability mass on
the correct answer will reproduce equivalent answer across samples, whereas an uncertain model will
produce varied outputs. For instance, if SLM A produces three equivalent answers while model B
produces three different ones, the answers from model A are more consistent and should be selected.
This correlation between consistency and correctness is observed by previous papers. (Wang et al.,
2023; Xie et al., 2024; Taubenfeld et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2023b), and we empirically revalidate
this observation in Appendix D.1.
In cases where two SLMs are equally consistent but disagree, we use their validation accuracy as
a tie-breaker. Prior work has shown that consistency is strongly correlated with correctness, which
provides a rationale for this design.
For more details, Algorithm 1 summarizes the workflow step by step. Figure 3 provides a visual
example of the workflow. The evaluation of SLM-MUX is presented in Section 4.2.
3.2
MODEL SELECTION SEARCH FOR SLM-MUX OPTIMIZATION
At a high level, the idea of model selection search is to combine models with complementary skills.
The goal is not simply to add more models, but to bring new capabilities as we add models. Figure 4
illustrates this intuition: Qwen2.5-7B consistently outperforms Llama3.2-3B across all subjects, so
combining them offers no capability beyond what Qwen2.5-7B already provides. In contrast, Mistral
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Small 24B and Qwen2.5-7B Mistral Small 24B and Qwen2.5-7B excels in different subjects, making
their combination more effective than either model individually.
We frame model selection as a search problem on the validation set with two competing objectives.
Our first objective is Union Accuracy, which reflects the overall accuracy of the system. The
higher the union accuracy is, the more questions a system can potentially answer. Formally, let
M = {m1, . . . , mK} denote the set of candidate models and D the validation set. For each model
mi ∈M, we record the subset of validation instances it solves correctly. Given a candidate subset
S ⊆M, the union accuracy is defined as
UnionAcc(S) =
1
|D|
X
x∈D
1{∃m ∈S : m(x) is correct}
The second objective is the Contradiction Penalty. It captures problematic cases where overconfident
wrong answers suppress correct predictions from other models. Consider two SLMs answering the
same multiple-choice question three times: the first model consistently outputs “A” (correct), while
the second consistently outputs “B” (incorrect but confident). Since SLM-MUX selects based
on consistency, both models would appear equally confident, making it impossible to distinguish
the correct answer from the confident but wrong one. We define this penalty as the percentage of
questions where at least one model consistently gives the wrong answer while another provides the
correct answer:
Contradiction(S) =
1
|D|
X
x∈D
1
(
∃m1 ∈S : m1(x) consistently wrong,
∃m2 ∈S : m2(x) correct
)
The final objective balances these competing factors:
O(S) = UnionAcc(S) −λ · Contradiction(S),
Where λ is a hyperparameter. Since the number of candidate models is not very large, we perform
an exhaustive search. We present visualization of the two search objectives and evaluation of the
searched model selection in Section 4.3.
The rationale behind this search objective is as follows: UnionAcc represents an optimistic upper
bound for SLM-MUX performance. It assumes an ideal selection mechanism capable of identifying
the correct answer whenever at least one model provides it, which is unrealistic in practice. Conversely,
when λ = 1, the search objective represents a pessimistic lower bound of SLM-MUX accuracy. This
setting assumes that in cases involving confidently wrong answers, the system will invariably select
the incorrect one. In practice, due to factors such as tie-breaking rules and the presence of confidently
correct answers, such a worst-case scenario will not always happen. Consequently, by employing the
objective O(S) = Acc(S) −λ · Contradiction(S), we estimate an approximate accuracy between
the theoretical upper and lower bounds of the SLM-MUX accuracy.
3.3
COMPUTE SCALING STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Qwen 2.5 7B
Llama 3.2 3B
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Qwen 2.5 7B
Mistral Small 24B
Figure 4: Comparison of Model Choices. Accuracy on 7 subjects
for two model selection settings on MATH dataset. Subjects are
denoted as: A = Prealgebra, B = Algebra, C = Intermediate Algebra,
D = Number Theory, E = Counting & Probability, F = Geometry, G
= Precalculus.
Next, we empirically investigate two
dimensions of test-time scaling to fur-
ther enhance the performance of our
SLM-MUX with selected models.
Adding More Participating Model
Types:
As we scale the model
participating model types used in the
system by adding more SLMs with
complementary strengths, we expect
the overall accuracy to improve. For
each budgeted number of models,
we use the search method proposed
in Section 3.2 to identify the best
selection from the pool.
Drawing More Samples per Model:
For a fixed model selection, we can
increase the compute budget by scaling the number of samples drawn by each model. Since confidence
is evaluated by counting the frequency of majority answers, adding more samples per model is
expected to provide a more accurate confidence estimate.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
These two compute scaling dimensions are evaluated in Section 4.4.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we first demonstrate the fundamental limitations of existing discussion-based
orchestration methods when applied to SLMs (Section 4.1). We then evaluate the proposed SLM-
MUX in Section 4.2. In Section 4.3, we assess our proposed search strategy. Finally, in Section 4.4,
we examine the compute scaling strategies.
4.1
EXISTING DISCUSSION-BASED ORCHESTRATION METHODS HARM SLM PERFORMANCE
To understand whether orchestration methods developed for frontier LLMs are suitable for SLMs, we
conduct a systematic comparison across model scales. We evaluate three prominent discussion-based
methods—LLM-Debate (Du et al., 2023), Mixture-of-Agents (Wang et al., 2024b), and Multi-Agent
Verification (Lifshitz et al., 2025) —using identical experimental settings on both SLMs (Llama 3.1
8B (Jiang et al., 2024), Mistral 8×7B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Gemma 2 27B) and frontier LLMs
(DeepSeek V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), Gemini 2.0 Flash (Google Cloud, 2025), GPT-4o (OpenAI
et al., 2024)). Evaluation is conducted on MATH and GPQA datasets using original code and prompts.
Results. As shown in Figure 5, discussion-based methods generally outperform the single best-
performing models in the frontier LLM group, achieving up to a 2% increase in accuracy. However,
when applied to SLMs, these discussion-based methods fail to outperform the best single model in
the orchestration, and even incur accuracy drops of up to 5.5%. This performance gap is observed
across all three methods and both benchmarks.
To understand this counterintuitive result, we analyze SLM behavior in discussion settings. We find
that discussion-based methods amplify rather than correct errors in SLMs due to a key limitation:
SLMs tend to exhibit groupthink, reinforcing incorrect reasoning during discussions rather than
correcting mistakes. In Appendix C, we provide detailed analysis showing that 59.5% of failures
are attributed to groupthink, and that the performance gap persists even after extensive prompt
optimization.
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Accuracy (%)
MATH
GPQA
56.8
46.2
51.6 48.4
38.8
33.3 36.9 35.4
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Accuracy (%)
MATH
GPQA
90.4 88.8 90.8 91.6
63.6
58.6
65.6 64.2
Single Model Max
Mixture-of-Agents
LLM-Debate
Multi-Agent Verification
(a) SLM Orchestration
(b) Large-Scale Model Composition
Figure 5: Comparison of discussion-based orchestration when invoking SLMs and LLMs. We compare
three orchestration methods (Mixture-of-Agents, LLM-Debate, and Verification) using (a) SLMs (Llama 3.1 8B,
Mistral 8×7B, Gemma 2 27B) and (b) frontier LLMs (DeepSeek V3, Gemini 2.0 Flash, GPT-4o) on the MATH
and GPQA datasets. The baseline (Single-Model Max) reflects the best performance of individual models. An
orchestration is considered successful if it surpasses Single-Model Max. All discussion-based methods are
evaluated with temperature=0. The standard deviations of the accuracies are presented in Appendix B.3.
4.2
SLM-MUX ACHIEVES SLM ORCHESTRATION WHERE EXISTING METHODS FAIL
21.2%
38.8%
38.0%
2.0%
No Disagreement
Llama 3.1 8B
Gemma-2 27B
Mixtral-8x7B
Figure 6: Final Output Attribution. We
report the percentage of outputs contributed
by each model on the MATH dataset for our
SLM-MUX. These results are from the same
run as in Table 1.
To evaluate whether our proposed SLM-MUX can suc-
cessfully orchestrate SLMs, we test it against the same
baselines from Section 4.1. We use Mistral 8×7B, LLaMA
3.1 8B, and Gemma 2 27B (Team et al., 2024) as base mod-
els. We implement the SLM-MUX as follows. First, we
generate three rounds of answers with a temperature of
0.3. Next, we compute a confidence score by counting
how often the most common answer appears across these
rounds. The final answer for each model is chosen as the
most frequent one; in the case of a tie, we select the answer
from the model with the highest validation accuracy.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
We evaluate three types of baselines. First, we measure
the accuracies of individual models and report the best-
performing ones. Second, we apply self-consistency to each of the three base models independently,
reporting the best-performing result as the Single-Best-SC baseline. Next, for comparison with exist-
ing discussion-based methods, we include LLM-Debate (Du et al., 2023), Mixture-of-Agents (Wang
et al., 2024b), and Multi-Agent Verification (Lifshitz et al., 2025). We follow the original code
and prompts described in their papers. Experiments are conducted on three benchmark datasets:
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), GPQA (Rein et al., 2023), and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021).
Results. Table 1 summarizes the results. In our experiments, we find that for SLMs, existing
orchestration methods do not consistently outperform the strongest individual base models or
self-consistency approaches. In contrast, our SLM-MUX generally achieves an accuracy gain.
Compared with other approaches, our method yields up to a 13.4% improvement on MATH, up to
8.8% on GPQA, and up to 7.0% on GSM8K. These results demonstrate that the SLM-MUX itself
provides a clear advantage over alternative orchestration approaches at the architectural level.
To better illustrate our proposed SLM-MUX, we plot the output attribution for the MATH experiment
(Table 1) in Figure 6. By selecting diverse outputs from the generation, SLM-MUX leverages the
complementary strengths of different SLMs.
Method
MATH Acc (%)
GPQA Acc (%)
GSM8K Acc (%)
Mixture-of-Agents
51.4 ± 2.2
33.3 ± 3.4
81.6 ± 1.7
LLM-Debate
51.6 ± 2.2
36.8 ± 3.4
80.8 ± 1.8
Multi-Agent Verification
48.4 ± 2.2
35.3 ± 3.4
86.4 ± 1.5
SLM-MUX (Ours)
61.8 ± 1.2
42.1 ± 0.3
87.8 ± 0.6
Single-Best
56.8 ± 2.2
38.9 ± 3.5
84.2 ± 1.6
Single-Best-SC
58.0 ± 2.2
42.4 ± 3.5
86.8 ± 1.5
Table 1: Quantitative Results. Accuracy and standard error across MATH, GPQA, and GSM8K. “SC” denotes
self-consistency decoding (majority vote over samples from a single model), and “Single-Best-SC” reports
the highest accuracy among the three base models when each applies self-consistency individually.
4.3
MODEL SELECTION SEARCH BOOSTS SLM-MUX PERFORMANCE
1
2
3
4
5
K
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Objective Value
Search Objectives for GPQA
Score
Union Accuracy
Contradiction Penalty
1
2
3
4
5
K
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
Objective Value
Search Objectives for GSM8K
Score
Union Accuracy
Contradiction Penalty
1
2
3
4
5
K
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
Objective Value
Search Objectives for MATH
Score
Union Accuracy
Contradiction Penalty
Figure 7: Union Accuracy and Contradiction Penalty both Increases as more models are added. We plot
the search objectives as the number of models (K) increases from 2 to 5 across three benchmarks. The green line
denotes the union accuracy across models, the grey area indicates the contradiction penalty, and the blue line
represents the overall search objective score. For each value of K, the plotted quantities are computed for the
single model combination that maximizes our model selection objective defined in Section 3.2.
To examine whether model selection search benefits SLM-MUX, we construct a validation set
of 500 questions sampled from the training splits of MATH, GPQA, and GSM8K. The candidate
pool consists of five SLMs: Gemma 2 27B, Llama 3.1 8B, Mistral Small 24B (Mistral AI, 2025),
Mixtral 8×7B, and Qwen2.5 7B (Qwen et al., 2025). For each question, we collect three independent
generations per model with temperature 0.5, repeating this process three times to obtain stable
accuracy estimates. The search procedure considers orchestrations with K = 2 to 5 models and is
guided by an objective function mentioned in Section 3, with hyperparameter λ = 1. The behavior of
this objective is illustrated in Figure 7, showing the trade-off as K increases. For simplicity, we select
two representative two-model combinations from the search results for evaluation on the test set.
Results. Table 2 summarizes the outcome of the search. The table lists the top-performing two-model
combinations identified on the validation set, along with their evaluation on the held-out test set.
Across benchmarks, these optimized orchestrations yield consistent improvements over the strongest
individual models: accuracy increases by 4.5% on MATH, 4.4% on GPQA, and 4.3% on GSM8K.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Benchmark
Group
Model Selection
Best Single
(Acc. %)
Composed
(Acc. %)
∆
(Gain)
MATH
1
Mistral Small 24B
Qwen2.5 7B
75.5 ± 1.5
80.0 ± 0.7
+4.5
2
Qwen2.5 7B
Llama 3.1 8B
75.5 ± 1.5
77.7 ± 0.7
+2.2
GPQA
1
Gemma 2 27B
Mistral Small 24B
45.1 ± 2.8
49.5 ± 1.8
+4.4
2
Llama 3.1 8B
Mistral Small 24B
45.1 ± 2.8
48.8 ± 0.8
+3.6
GSM8K
1
Mistral Small 24B
Qwen2.5 7B
88.5 ± 0.7
92.8 ± 0.6
+4.3
2
Llama 3.1 8B
Mixtral 8×7B
80.8 ± 2.1
85.2 ± 0.7
+4.4
Table 2: Model Selection Search and Evaluation Results. We show the top two model groups identified by our
search for each benchmark. For each group, we report the accuracy of the best-performing single model within
the orchestration, the accuracy achieved by our SLM-MUX, and the resulting performance gain.
This contrasts with Section 4.2, where naive three-model combinations provide little to no benefit
on GPQA. Figure 7 further illustrates the underlying trade-off: while union accuracy rises with
additional models, the contradiction penalty also grows, emphasizing that effective orchestration
requires balancing these competing factors rather than simply enlarging the orchestration size. In
Appendix D.3, we show that the SLM-MUX architecture itself yields consistent gains even with
randomly selected model combinations; the search procedure provides an effective and data-efficient
way to further boost accuracy.
4.4
COMPUTE SCALING STRATEGIES REVEAL OPTIMAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION
To evaluate the “Adding More Participating Model Types" dimension of compute scaling, we assess
how performance changes as the number of models in the orchestration increases. For each number
of models from 2 to 5, we first apply the search method from Section 3.2 to identify the optimal
model selection from our pool. We then evaluate SLM-MUX with selected models on the validation
set. Figure 9 plots the resulting mean accuracy (blue line, left y-axis) for each value of K. To illustrate
the theoretical performance ceiling of each ensemble, we also plot the union accuracy (grey line, right
y-axis), defined as the percentage of questions solved by at least one model in the group. For each
value of K in Figure 9, we show the single model combination that achieves the highest value of our
model selection objective from Section 3.2; the search procedure is used to find the best combination
under a fixed K, rather than to choose K itself.
Benchmark
Samples
SLM-MUX
Agent Forest
∆(Gain)
MATH
2
76.8 ± 0.7
72.3 ± 1.5
+4.5
Best
79.5 ± 0.4
79.2 ± 0.4
+0.3
GPQA
2
46.3 ± 2.3
40.4 ± 2.3
+5.9
Best
48.8 ± 1.2
47.6 ± 1.4
+1.2
GSM8K
2
82.1 ± 0.7
77.7 ± 0.2
+4.4
Best
86.5 ± 0.8
84.3 ± 0.8
+2.2
Table 3: Comparison of SLM-MUX and Agent Forest. We compare SLM-MUX and Agent Forest in two
settings: (1) with 2 samples per model (Samples=2), and (2) using the best accuracy found during scaling for
each method (Samples=best). In the second setting, the number of samples per model may vary.
For the “Drawing More Samples per Model” dimension, we reuse the two groups of models listed
in Table 2. We vary the number of samples per model from 2 to 9 and report the mean accuracy of
SLM-MUX over three runs for each sample budget. The results are presented in Figure 8, along
with a baseline, Agent Forest (Li et al., 2024), for comparison. To ensure fairness, Agent Forest
is reproduced using the same models from Group 2. We report the best accuracy achieved by the
SLM-MUX when scaling with Samples per Model and compare it to the accuracy of the single best
model in the orchestration, as shown in Table 2.
Results. The effect of “Adding More Participating Model Types” varies substantially across bench-
marks. On GPQA, accuracy peaks when combining two models and declines thereafter. On GSM8K,
accuracy quickly saturates at two models without further gains. In contrast, on MATH, accuracy
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Samples per Model
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
Accuracy (%)
Drawing More Samples per Model for GPQA
Group 1
Group 2
Agent Forest
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Samples per Model
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
Accuracy (%)
Drawing More Samples per Model for GSM8K
Group 1
Group 2
Agent Forest
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Samples per Model
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
Accuracy (%)
Drawing More Samples per Model for MATH
Group 1
Group 2
Agent Forest
Figure 8: Drawing More Samples per Model Improves Accuracy. We report mean accuracy of SLM-MUX
as the number of samples per model increases from 2 to 9 across three benchmarks. Group 1 and Group 2 are
from Table 2. We also plot the mean accuracy of Agent Forest (Li et al., 2024) in grey line.
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for GPQA
Accuracy
Union
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
89
90
91
92
93
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for GSM8K
Accuracy
Union
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for MATH
Accuracy
Union
48
56
64
72
Union Accuracy (%)
90
92
94
96
98
Union Accuracy (%)
72
75
78
81
84
Union Accuracy (%)
Figure 9: Adding More Participating Models Affects Accuracy Differently. We report the mean accuracy
(blue line) of the optimal SLM-MUX obtained when using 2 to 5 models across three benchmarks. We also
report the union accuracy (grey line), defined in Section 3.2. The blue line (Mean Accuracy) is plotted against
the left-hand Y-axis. The grey line (Union Accuracy) is plotted against the right-hand Y-axis. For each K, both
curves correspond to the single model combination that maximizes our model selection objective (Section 3.2)
under that fixed K.
continues to improve as additional models are included. Despite these differences, the union accuracy
of model orchestration consistently increases with more models, emphasizing the role of output
contradictions among models, as elaborated in Section 3.2. We also validate this scaling behavior on
the test set; see Appendix D.4 for details.
“Drawing More Samples per Model” yields more consistent improvements across benchmarks.
Moreover, under this setting, our SLM-MUX systematically outperforms Agent Forest, with the
largest margin observed on GPQA, where single-model accuracy is lowest.
Benchmark
Group 1
Group 2
Qwen-2.5 72B Acc. %
Acc. %
∆(Gain)
Acc. %
∆(Gain)
MATH
81.9 ± 0.2
+6.4
79.5 ± 0.4
+4.0
82.3 ± 0.5
GPQA
49.9 ± 1.8
+4.8
48.7 ± 1.2
+3.6
44.9 ± 0.5
GSM8K
93.7 ± 0.2
+5.2
86.5 ± 0.8
+5.7
90.4 ± 0.3
Table 4: Best Accuracy after Sample Scaling beats Larger Model. Acc indicates the highest accuracy
achieved through scaling. Groups 1 & 2 are defined in Table 2. Gain represents the improvement over the best
single-model accuracy reported in Table 2. For reference, we also include the performance of the large model
Qwen-2.5 72B, showing that our composed small models can outperform it on GPQA and GSM8K.
5
DISCUSSION
Mathematical Intuition behind SLM-MUX. Different SLMs have complementary strengths: for any
given question, some models are more likely to answer correctly than others. SLM-MUX exploits
this by selecting the most self-consistent model’s output through a simple rule-based mechanism that
requires no inter-model communication.
The key insight is that the confidence score can identify the strongest model. We assume that for
each question, there is a unique correct answer, while incorrect answers are scattered rather than
clustered. Under this assumption, a model with higher accuracy pi produces the correct answer more
frequently across N samples, leading to a higher confidence score. Therefore, selecting the model
with the highest confidence score effectively identifies the model most likely to be correct.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
More formally, consider K models where model i has probability pi of being correct. Let i∗=
arg maxi pi denote the strongest model with margin γ = pi∗−maxj̸=i∗pj > 0. Under our
assumption, the confidence score si (the frequency of the most common answer over N samples)
concentrates around pi. Applying Hoeffding’s inequality and a union bound, the probability of
correctly selecting the strongest model satisfies:
Pr(ˆi = i∗) ≥1 −2(K −1) exp

−Nγ2
2

.
This bound shows that the probability of misidentifying the strongest model decays exponentially
with sample size N.
This selection mechanism explains why SLM-MUX outperforms alternatives. Unlike a single fixed
model, SLM-MUX performs per-question routing, effectively achieving accuracy pmax by always
selecting the strongest available expert. Unlike pooling methods such as Agent Forest that aggregate
outputs from all models, SLM-MUX avoids interference from weaker models. For instance, if the
strongest model has p1 = 0.8 and a weaker one has p2 = 0.3, pooling their outputs merely dilutes
the correct answer’s frequency. By isolating the strongest model and selecting its most frequent
answer, SLM-MUX preserves the full predictive power of the most reliable source. We provide a
more detailed comparative analysis with self-consistency and Agent Forest in Appendix D.2.
Extending SLM-MUX to Open-Ended Generation.. Although the current implementation of
SLM-MUX relies on majority voting and is therefore restricted to tasks with discrete answer spaces,
the underlying idea of selecting the most self-consistent model is more general. For open-ended
generation, one can replace majority voting with alternative consistency estimators, such as LLM-
as-a-judge scoring or embedding-based similarity measures. In Appendix E.1, we show a simple
extension of SLM-MUX to HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) using this idea and observe strong
empirical gains.
Extending SLM-MUX Beyond Generalist SLMs.. The experiments above focus on general-
purpose SLMs. We further evaluate whether the consistency-based selection principle extends to
other settings: (1) frontier LLMs such as GPT-4o and Gemini-2.5-Flash, and (2) domain-specific
fine-tuned models such as code and math specialists. In both cases, SLM-MUX achieves consistent
improvements over the best single model. Full experimental details are provided in Appendix E.
Limitation and Future Work. The SLM-MUX framework has two main limitations. First, its
design is static and does not adapt to specific questions. For every query, it uses a fixed group of
models that are pre-selected through exhaustive search – a method that is slow and costly when there
are many models to choose from. When models are tied, the framework uses their past accuracy on
a validation set to decide, which is also a fixed, non-adaptive rule. Second, the way the framework
measures model confidence is simple. It relies only on self-consistency – how often a model produces
the same answer. This can be a problem because a model can be very consistent while still being
incorrect.
Conclusion. This work demonstrates that orchestration methods designed for frontier models
paradoxically degrade the performance of SLMs by amplifying errors. To address this, we propose
SLM-MUX, a framework that avoids inter-model discussion, instead selecting the most reliable
output based on each model’s self-consistency. We further introduce a model selection search
algorithm to find complementary model combinations. Experiments show our method not only
substantially outperforms existing strategies but also enables an ensemble of just two SLMs to surpass
the much larger Qwen-2.5 72B model on key reasoning benchmarks. In summary, our work validates
that intelligently orchestrating multiple efficient models—a "multi-core" approach—is a promising
alternative to scaling monolithic models on the path toward more capable AI systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tom Griffiths from Princeton University, whose insights and feedback were instrumental in
initiating this project.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Elie Bakouch, Gabriel Martín Blázquez, Guilherme Penedo,
Lewis Tunstall, Andrés Marafioti, Hynek Kydlíˇcek, Agustín Piqueres Lajarín, Vaibhav Srivastav,
et al. Smollm2: When smol goes big–data-centric training of a small language model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.02737, 2025. 1
Peter Belcak, Greg Heinrich, Shizhe Diao, Yonggan Fu, Xin Dong, Saurav Muralidharan, Yingyan Ce-
line Lin, and Pavlo Molchanov. Small language models are the future of agentic ai. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.02153, 2025. 1
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use large language models while
reducing cost and improving performance, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.
05176. 3
Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Matei Zaharia, James Zou, and Ion
Stoica. Optimizing model selection for compound ai systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2502.14815. 3
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen
Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray,
Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens
Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas
Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher
Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford,
Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario
Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language
models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374. 10
Shuhao Chen, Weisen Jiang, Baijiong Lin, James T. Kwok, and Yu Zhang. Routerdc: Query-
based router by dual contrastive learning for assembling large language models, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19886. 3
Xinyun Chen, Renat Aksitov, Uri Alon, Jie Ren, Kefan Xiao, Pengcheng Yin, Sushant Prakash,
Charles Sutton, Xuezhi Wang, and Denny Zhou. Universal self-consistency for large language
model generation, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17311. 4
Yinlam Chow, Guy Tennenholtz, Izzeddin Gur, Vincent Zhuang, Bo Dai, Sridhar Thiagarajan, Craig
Boutilier, Rishabh Agarwal, Aviral Kumar, and Aleksandra Faust. Inference-aware fine-tuning for
best-of-n sampling in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.
15287. 3
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2110.14168. 7
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang
Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli
Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen,
Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding,
Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi
Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song,
Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang,
Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan
Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang,
Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi
Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li,
Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye,
Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang,
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu,
Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang,
Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha
Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu,
Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su,
Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong
Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng,
Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan
Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue
Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo,
Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu,
Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou,
Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu
Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan.
Deepseek-v3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437. 6
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325. 1, 2, 6, 7
Tianyu Fu, Zihan Min, Hanling Zhang, Jichao Yan, Guohao Dai, Wanli Ouyang, and Yu Wang.
Cache-to-cache: Direct semantic communication between large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.03215, 2025. 2
Google Cloud. Gemini 2.0 flash | generative ai on vertex ai. https://cloud.google.com/
vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/models/gemini/2-0-flash, 2025. Accessed:
2025-09-24. 6
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev,
Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru,
Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak,
Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu,
Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle
Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego
Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova,
Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel
Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon,
Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan
Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet,
Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde,
Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie
Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua
Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak,
Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley
Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri,
Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie
Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes
Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne,
Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal
Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie
Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana
Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie,
Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon
Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan,
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas
Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami,
Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti,
Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier
Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao
Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song,
Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe
Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya
Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei
Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu,
Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit
Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury,
Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer,
Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu,
Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido,
Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu
Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer,
Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu,
Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc
Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers,
Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank
Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee,
Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan,
Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph,
Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog,
Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James
Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny
Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings,
Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai
Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik
Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle
Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng
Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish
Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim
Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle
Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang,
Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam,
Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier,
Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia
Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro
Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani,
Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy,
Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin
Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu,
Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh
Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay,
Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang,
Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie
Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta,
Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman,
Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun
Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria
Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru,
Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz,
Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv
Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait,
Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783. 6
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025. 1
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03874. 7
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.01798. 2
Mojan Javaheripi and Sébastien Bubeck. Phi-2: The surprising power of small language models. Mi-
crosoft Research Blog, 2023. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
blog/phi-2-the-surprising-power-of-small-language-models/. 1
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand,
Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le
Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
Mixtral of experts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088. 6
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller,
Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into
self-improving pipelines, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03714. 3
Junyou Li, Qin Zhang, Yangbin Yu, Qiang Fu, and Deheng Ye. More agents is all you need, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05120. 2, 3, 8, 9
Shalev Lifshitz, Sheila A. McIlraith, and Yilun Du. Multi-agent verification: Scaling test-time
compute with multiple verifiers, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20379. 1,
2, 3, 6, 7
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172. 2
Mistral AI.
Mistral small 24b instruct.
https://huggingface.co/mistralai/
Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-23. 7
Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time
scaling, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19393. 3
Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tianhao Wu, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica. Routellm: Learning to route llms with preference data, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18665. 3
OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan
Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛adry, Alex Baker-
Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex
Paino, Alex Renzin, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Kirillov, Alexi Christakis, Alexis Conneau,
Ali Kamali, Allan Jabri, Allison Moyer, Allison Tam, Amadou Crookes, Amin Tootoochian,
Amin Tootoonchian, Ananya Kumar, Andrea Vallone, Andrej Karpathy, Andrew Braunstein,
Andrew Cann, Andrew Codispoti, Andrew Galu, Andrew Kondrich, Andrew Tulloch, Andrey
Mishchenko, Angela Baek, Angela Jiang, Antoine Pelisse, Antonia Woodford, Anuj Gosalia,
Arka Dhar, Ashley Pantuliano, Avi Nayak, Avital Oliver, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben
Leimberger, Ben Rossen, Ben Sokolowsky, Ben Wang, Benjamin Zweig, Beth Hoover, Blake
Samic, Bob McGrew, Bobby Spero, Bogo Giertler, Bowen Cheng, Brad Lightcap, Brandon
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Walkin, Brendan Quinn, Brian Guarraci, Brian Hsu, Bright Kellogg, Brydon Eastman, Camillo
Lugaresi, Carroll Wainwright, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Casey Chu, Chad Nelson, Chak Li,
Chan Jun Shern, Channing Conger, Charlotte Barette, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Cheng Lu,
Chong Zhang, Chris Beaumont, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Christian Gibson, Christina Kim,
Christine Choi, Christine McLeavey, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clemens Winter, Coley
Czarnecki, Colin Jarvis, Colin Wei, Constantin Koumouzelis, Dane Sherburn, Daniel Kappler,
Daniel Levin, Daniel Levy, David Carr, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, David Sasaki,
Denny Jin, Dev Valladares, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Duc Phong Nguyen, Duncan Findlay,
Edede Oiwoh, Edmund Wong, Ehsan Asdar, Elizabeth Proehl, Elizabeth Yang, Eric Antonow, Eric
Kramer, Eric Peterson, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Eugene Brevdo, Evan Mays, Farzad Khorasani,
Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Francis Zhang, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Gabriel Goh,
Gene Oden, Geoff Salmon, Giulio Starace, Greg Brockman, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Haitang
Hu, Hannah Wong, Haoyu Wang, Heather Schmidt, Heather Whitney, Heewoo Jun, Hendrik
Kirchner, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Hongyu Ren, Huiwen Chang, Hyung Won Chung,
Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Okuyucu,
Ikai Lan, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jacob Coxon,
Jacob Menick, Jakub Pachocki, James Aung, James Betker, James Crooks, James Lennon, Jamie
Kiros, Jan Leike, Jane Park, Jason Kwon, Jason Phang, Jason Teplitz, Jason Wei, Jason Wolfe,
Jay Chen, Jeff Harris, Jenia Varavva, Jessica Gan Lee, Jessica Shieh, Ji Lin, Jiahui Yu, Jiayi
Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joanne Jang, Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Joe Beutler, Joe Landers,
Joel Parish, Johannes Heidecke, John Schulman, Jonathan Lachman, Jonathan McKay, Jonathan
Uesato, Jonathan Ward, Jong Wook Kim, Joost Huizinga, Jordan Sitkin, Jos Kraaijeveld, Josh
Gross, Josh Kaplan, Josh Snyder, Joshua Achiam, Joy Jiao, Joyce Lee, Juntang Zhuang, Justyn
Harriman, Kai Fricke, Kai Hayashi, Karan Singhal, Katy Shi, Kavin Karthik, Kayla Wood, Kendra
Rimbach, Kenny Hsu, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Button, Kevin Liu, Kiel Howe,
Krithika Muthukumar, Kyle Luther, Lama Ahmad, Larry Kai, Lauren Itow, Lauren Workman,
Leher Pathak, Leo Chen, Li Jing, Lia Guy, Liam Fedus, Liang Zhou, Lien Mamitsuka, Lilian Weng,
Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Long Ouyang, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lukas Kondraciuk,
Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Hewitt, Luke Metz, Lyric Doshi, Mada Aflak, Maddie Simens, Madelaine
Boyd, Madeleine Thompson, Marat Dukhan, Mark Chen, Mark Gray, Mark Hudnall, Marvin
Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Mateusz Litwin, Matthew Zeng, Max Johnson, Maya Shetty, Mayank
Gupta, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz, Meng Jia Yang, Mengchao Zhong, Mia Glaese, Mianna
Chen, Michael Janner, Michael Lampe, Michael Petrov, Michael Wu, Michele Wang, Michelle
Fradin, Michelle Pokrass, Miguel Castro, Miguel Oom Temudo de Castro, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles
Brundage, Miles Wang, Minal Khan, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Murat Yesildal, Nacho
Soto, Natalia Gimelshein, Natalie Cone, Natalie Staudacher, Natalie Summers, Natan LaFontaine,
Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nick Stathas, Nick Turley, Nik Tezak, Niko Felix, Nithanth Kudige,
Nitish Keskar, Noah Deutsch, Noel Bundick, Nora Puckett, Ofir Nachum, Ola Okelola, Oleg Boiko,
Oleg Murk, Oliver Jaffe, Olivia Watkins, Olivier Godement, Owen Campbell-Moore, Patrick
Chao, Paul McMillan, Pavel Belov, Peng Su, Peter Bak, Peter Bakkum, Peter Deng, Peter Dolan,
Peter Hoeschele, Peter Welinder, Phil Tillet, Philip Pronin, Philippe Tillet, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Qiming Yuan, Rachel Dias, Rachel Lim, Rahul Arora, Rajan Troll, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo
Lopes, Raul Puri, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renaud Gaubert, Reza Zamani, Ricky Wang, Rob
Donnelly, Rob Honsby, Rocky Smith, Rohan Sahai, Rohit Ramchandani, Romain Huet, Rory
Carmichael, Rowan Zellers, Roy Chen, Ruby Chen, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Ryan Cheu, Saachi
Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Schoenholz, Sam Toizer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sara
Culver, Scott Ethersmith, Scott Gray, Sean Grove, Sean Metzger, Shamez Hermani, Shantanu
Jain, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shino Jomoto, Shirong Wu, Shuaiqi, Xia, Sonia Phene, Spencer
Papay, Srinivas Narayanan, Steve Coffey, Steve Lee, Stewart Hall, Suchir Balaji, Tal Broda, Tal
Stramer, Tao Xu, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas
Cunninghman, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Thomas Raoux, Thomas Shadwell, Tianhao
Zheng, Todd Underwood, Todor Markov, Toki Sherbakov, Tom Rubin, Tom Stasi, Tomer Kaftan,
Tristan Heywood, Troy Peterson, Tyce Walters, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Veit Moeller, Vinnie
Monaco, Vishal Kuo, Vlad Fomenko, Wayne Chang, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wesam Manassra,
Will Sheu, Wojciech Zaremba, Yash Patil, Yilei Qian, Yongjik Kim, Youlong Cheng, Yu Zhang,
Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yujia Jin, Yunxing Dai, and Yury Malkov. Gpt-4o system card, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276. 6
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Krista Opsahl-Ong, Michael J Ryan, Josh Purtell, David Broman, Christopher Potts, Matei Zaharia,
and Omar Khattab. Optimizing instructions and demonstrations for multi-stage language model
programs, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11695. 3
Manhin Poon, XiangXiang Dai, Xutong Liu, Fang Kong, John Lui, and Jinhang Zuo. Online
multi-llm selection via contextual bandits under unstructured context evolution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.17670, 2025. 3
Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi
Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115. 7
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani,
Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022. 7
Jon Saad-Falcon, Adrian Gamarra Lafuente, Shlok Natarajan, Nahum Maru, Hristo Todorov, Etash
Guha, E. Kelly Buchanan, Mayee Chen, Neel Guha, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini.
Archon: An architecture search framework for inference-time techniques, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2409.15254. 3
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
can be more effective than scaling model parameters, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2408.03314. 3
Amir Taubenfeld, Yaniv Dover, Roi Reichart, and Ariel Goldstein. Systematic biases in llm simula-
tions of debates. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 251–267. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
emnlp-main.16. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.16. 2
Amir Taubenfeld, Tom Sheffer, Eran Ofek, Amir Feder, Ariel Goldstein, Zorik Gekhman, and Gal
Yona. Confidence improves self-consistency in llms. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 20090–20111. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2025. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1030. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/
v1/2025.findings-acl.1030. 4
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya
Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan
Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar,
Charline Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin,
Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur,
Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison,
Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge, Antonia
Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar, Chris
Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger,
Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozi´nska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang, Eric
Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin, Gary
Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Pluci´nska, Harleen Batra,
Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha
Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost
van Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed,
Kartikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia,
Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago,
Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel
Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow,
Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moynihan,
Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao, Nenshad
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil Botarda,
Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culliton, Pradeep
Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni, Rishabh
Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Cogan, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien
M. R. Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan
Chan, Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi,
Vihan Jain, Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei,
Wenming Ye, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei,
Victor Cotruta, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins,
Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav
Petrov, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena
Buchatskaya, Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi,
and Alek Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118. 6
Raghuveer Thirukovalluru, Yukun Huang, and Bhuwan Dhingra. Atomic self-consistency for better
long form generations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.13131. 3
Fouad Trad and Ali Chehab. To Ensemble or Not: Assessing Majority Voting Strategies for Phishing
Detection with Large Language Models, pp. 158–173. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025. ISBN
9783031821509. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-82150-9_13. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-031-82150-9_13. 3
Fali Wang, Zhiwei Zhang, Xianren Zhang, Zongyu Wu, Tzuhao Mo, Qiuhao Lu, Wanjing Wang, Rui
Li, Junjie Xu, Xianfeng Tang, Qi He, Yao Ma, Ming Huang, and Suhang Wang. A comprehensive
survey of small language models in the era of large language models: Techniques, enhancements,
applications, collaboration with llms, and trustworthiness, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2411.03350. 1
Junlin Wang, Jue Wang, Ben Athiwaratkun, Ce Zhang, and James Zou. Mixture-of-agents enhances
large language model capabilities, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04692.
1, 2, 6, 7
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171. 2, 4
Zhihui Xie, Jizhou Guo, Tong Yu, and Shuai Li. Calibrating reasoning in language models with
internal consistency, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18711. 4
Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen
Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin
Wu. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2410.10762. 3
Qiyuan Zhang, Fuyuan Lyu, Zexu Sun, Lei Wang, Weixu Zhang, Wenyue Hua, Haolun Wu, Zhihan
Guo, Yufei Wang, Niklas Muennighoff, Irwin King, Xue Liu, and Chen Ma.
A survey on
test-time scaling in large language models: What, how, where, and how well?, 2025b. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.24235. 3
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX OVERVIEW
The appendix is organized into five main sections. Section A states the usage of LLMs in preparing
this paper. Section B provides experimental details, including visual illustrations, single-model
accuracies, and standard deviation calculations. Section C analyzes why discussion-based methods
fail on SLMs, presenting groupthink analysis and prompt sensitivity studies. Section D validates the
SLM-MUX design through consistency-accuracy correlation analysis, comparative analysis with
voting-based methods, model selection search analysis, and test-set scaling validation. Section E
demonstrates the generalization of SLM-MUX to open-ended generation, frontier LLMs, and
domain-specific models. Finally, Section F provides dataset licenses.
A
LLM USAGE STATEMENT
We used Cursor for coding. Large language models (LLMs) were employed to help polish drafts
written by humans, and to assist in searching for related papers. The final choice of related work
included in this paper was made entirely by the human authors after careful screening. LLMs were
also used for proofreading and for providing suggestions.
B
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1
VISUAL ILLUSTRATIONS OF SLM-MUX
To more effectively illustrate the workflow of our proposed composition method, we select several
representative examples from the logs. We demonstrate them in Figure 10, Figure 11 and Figure 12.
SLM-MUX surpasses majority voting in scenarios with initial disagreement among models..
As illustrated by Figure 10, during the independent generation phase, Gemma-2-27B is the sole
model to provide the correct answer. Hence, majority voting applied directly would fail to select the
correct author.
Llama:
Gemma:
Mixtral:
Output 1: To convert the 
decimal number, …, 4220
Output 2: To express 555 in 
base, …, 4210
Output 3: To express 555 in 
base 5, …, 100
Output 1: Here's how to 
convert 555, …, 4210
Output 2: Here's how to 
convert 555, …, 4210
Output 3: Here's how to 
convert 555 from, .., 4210
Output 1: First, we need to 
perform repeated, …, 1
Output 2: To express the 
decimal number, …, 4121
Output 3: First, we need to 
perform repeated, …, 1
Confidence: 33%
Confidence: 100%
Confidence: 67%
Historical Accuracy: 49%
Historical Accuracy: 57%
Historical Accuracy: 32%
Question: Express 555 in base 5.
Correct Answer: 4210
Independent Generation Phase
Reliability Estimation Phase
Figure 10: An illustration of the SLM-MUX method applied to the MATH dataset. In the independent
generation phase, three models are used: LLaMA-3.1-8B (denoted as Llama), Gemma-2-27B (denoted as
Gemma), and Mixtral-8×7B (denoted as Mixtral). Because the three models provide different answers at first,
so each model is invoked two more times. Gemma obtains the highest confidence score and is therefore selected
as the final output.
B.2
ACCURACY OF SINGLE LLMS
We evaluated the accuracy of single model accuracy under the condition of temperature equal to zero.
The results are shown in Table 5 and Table 6.
Model
MATH Acc (%)
GPQA Acc (%)
GSM Acc (%)
Llama-3.1-8B
48.6
23.7
84.2
Mistral-8×7B
31.6
31.9
63.4
Gemma-2-27B
56.8
38.8
81.6
Table 5: Small Model Base Performance. Base model accuracy on MATH, GPQA, and GSM8K.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Llama:
Gemma:
Mixtral:
Output 1: To solve this 
problem, … ,750
Output 2: To solve this 
problem, … , 50
Output 3: Let's break down 
the problem step, …, 25
Output 1: Here's how to 
solve the problem, … ,50
Output 2: Here's how to 
solve the problem, … ,50
Output 3: Here's how to 
solve the problem, … ,50
Output 1: First, let's 
determine how, …, 150
Output 2: First, let's 
determine how, …, 25
Output 3: First, let's 
determine how, …, 50
Confidence: 33%
Confidence: 100%
Confidence: 33%
Historical Accuracy: 84%
Historical Accuracy: 82%
Historical Accuracy: 64%
Question: Elvis has a monthly saving target of $1125. In April, he wants to save twice as much daily 
in the second half as he saves in the first half in order to hit his target. How much does he have to save 
for each day in the second half of the month?
Correct Answer: 50
Independent Generation Phase
Reliability Estimation Phase
Figure 11: An illustration of the SLM-MUX method applied to the GSM8K dataset. In the independent
generation phase, different models produce different answers. However, when we invoke each model multiple
times, we observe that Llama and Mixtral only yield correct answers approximately one-third of the time. In
contrast, Gemma demonstrates stable performance.
Llama:
Gemma:
Mixtral:
Output 1: Answer: C, 
Explanation:  …
Output 2: Answer: A, In basic 
solutions, …
Output 3: Answer: D , In 
basic solutions, …
Output 1: Answer: D, … 
Output 2: Answer: D, … 
Output 3: Answer: D, … 
Output 1: To answer this 
question, …, A
Output 2: To answer this 
question, …, A
Output 3: To answer this 
question, …, A
Confidence: 33%
Confidence: 100%
Confidence: 100%
Historical Accuracy: 24%
Historical Accuracy: 32%
Historical Accuracy: 39%
Question: Question: A student regrets that he fell asleep during a lecture in electrochemistry, facing 
the following incomplete statement in a test:  "Thermodynamically, oxygen is a …… oxidant in basic 
solutions. Kinetically, oxygen reacts …… in acidic solutions." Which combination of weaker/stronger 
and faster/slower is correct?
(A) weaker – slower  
(B) stronger – slower  
(C) weaker – faster  
(D) stronger – faster
Correct Answer: (A)
Independent Generation Phase
Reliability Estimation Phase
Figure 12: An illustration of the SLM-MUX method applied to the GPQA dataset. During the independent
generation phase, Gemma and Mixtral obtain the same confidence score. However, considering historical
accuracy, Mixtral ranks higher. Therefore, Mixtral’s answer is selected as the final output.
B.3
STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE DATA POINTS IN FIGURE 5
Although all experiments are run in a deterministic setting with temperature set to zero, we can still
compute the standard deviation of each datapoint by treating the outcome as a Bernoulli variable.
Specifically, if there are ncorrect correct answers and nwrong incorrect answers, the standard deviation
Model
MATH
GPQA
Accuracy (%)
Token Usage
Accuracy (%)
Token Usage
DeepSeek V3
87.0
419,513
55.1
173,885
Gemini 2.0 Flash
90.4
361,737
63.6
195,576
GPT-4o
79.8
408,410
51.0
212,037
Table 6: Large Model Base Performance. Base model performance and token usage on MATH and GPQA
datasets. Accuracy is the percentage of correct answers, and token usage reflects total tokens consumed (prompt
+ response) over the entire dataset for each model.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
is
p
Var(X)
√ntotal
=
p
p(1 −p)
√ntotal
=
s
ncorrect
ntotal

1 −ncorrect
ntotal

√ntotal
,
where ntotal = ncorrect + nwrong.
The results are summarized in Table 7.
Table 7: Accuracy and estimated standard deviation on MATH (n = 500) and GPQA (n = 196) using datapoints
from Figure 5.
MATH (n = 500)
GPQA (n = 196)
Method
SLM orchestration
LLM composition
SLM orchestration
LLM composition
Single Model Max
56.8 ± 2.22
90.4 ± 1.32
38.8 ± 3.48
63.6 ± 3.44
Mixture-of-Agents
46.2 ± 2.23
88.8 ± 1.41
33.3 ± 3.37
58.6 ± 3.52
LLM-Debate
51.6 ± 2.23
90.8 ± 1.29
36.9 ± 3.45
65.6 ± 3.39
Multi-Agent Verification
48.4 ± 2.23
91.6 ± 1.24
35.4 ± 3.42
64.2 ± 3.42
C
WHY DISCUSSION-BASED METHODS FAIL ON SLMS
C.1
GROUPTHINK ANALYSIS
We analyze the experiment logs of LLM-Debate using small language models (SLMs) in Section 4.1.
Among 500 debate problems, 242 resulted in failure (48.4%). For each of the 242 failed debates, we
first used an analyzer LLM to produce a process-focused failure analysis. We then used a separate
labeling LLM to classify whether each failed debate was due to groupthink.
The labeling results are shown in Table 8:
These results reinforce our claim that groupthink is a major failure mode in SLM-based LLM-debate.
We provide the exact prompts used by (i) the analyzer LLM to generate the 242 failure analyses
(Figure 13) and (ii) the groupthink labeler LLM to classify groupthink (Figure 14). Placeholders such
as {problem} indicate runtime substitutions by our code.
C.2
PROMPT SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
A natural concern is whether the performance gap between discussion-based methods and SLM-
MUX is due to suboptimal prompt selection rather than inherent limitations. To address this, we
conduct a prompt sensitivity analysis on the Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) baseline using the MATH
benchmark.
We use Gemini-2.5-Flash to generate 10 diverse aggregator prompts for MoA. Table 9 summarizes
the results. Our baseline prompt (46.2%) outperforms the average of the tuned prompts (41.8%) and
surpasses 7 out of 10 generated prompts. Even the best tuned prompt (48.4%) remains substantially
below the best single model (56.8%) and SLM-MUX (61.8%).
To further stress-test this result, we conducted iterative prompt optimization directly on the test set for
6 rounds, selecting the best-performing prompt at each iteration. Even under this extremely favorable
setting for MoA, the accuracy peaked at 55.6%, still below the best single model (56.8%) and far
below SLM-MUX (61.8%). This confirms that the performance gap reflects inherent limitations of
discussion-based aggregation when applied to SLMs, rather than an artifact of prompt selection.
D
VALIDATION OF SLM-MUX DESIGN
D.1
CONSISTENCY VS ACCURACY CORRELATION
We empirically study how per-question self-consistency correlates with accuracy on four datasets:
GSM8K, MATH, GPQA, and HUMANEVAL. For each model–dataset pair, we compute a self-
consistency score for every question (as defined in the main text) and group questions into three bins
according to this score: Low [0.0, 0.5), Medium [0.5, 0.8), and High [0.8, 1.0]. We then measure the
empirical accuracy (fraction of correct answers) within each bin.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
As an expert in analyzing multi-agent AI systems, your task is to
analyze why an ’LLM Debate’ process failed to find the correct
answer. Your focus should be on the *debate dynamics and
process*, not just the mathematical details. The goal is to
understand the failure of the debate methodology itself.
**Ground Truth:**
- **Problem Statement:** {problem}
- **Correct Answer:** {ref_answer}
**Debate Information:**
- **Final Incorrect Answer from System:** {system_answer}
**Analysis of Round 1:**
- **Model ‘{model_name}‘ proposed:**
- Answer: ‘{extracted_answer}‘
- Reasoning:
‘‘‘
{full_text}
‘‘‘
... (repeats per round and per model)
**Your Analysis Task:**
Based on the debate history, provide a "Debate Failure Analysis".
Do not focus on simple calculation mistakes. Instead, analyze
the interaction between the models and the structure of the
debate. Pinpoint the core reasons the *debate process* failed.
Consider these questions:
1.
**Error Propagation vs. Correction:** How did initial errors
influence later rounds? Were there moments where a correct
idea was introduced but ignored or overruled? Why did the
debate fail to self-correct?
2.
**Groupthink and Influence Dynamics:** Did the models converge
on a flawed consensus? Did one or more influential but
incorrect models lead the group astray? Was there evidence of
independent reasoning that was shut down?
3.
**Argumentation Quality:** Did the models provide convincing
but ultimately flawed arguments? Did they effectively
challenge each other’s reasoning, or was the debate
superficial?
4.
**Critical Failure Point in the Debate:** Identify the single
most critical turn or moment in the debate that sealed its
failure. What happened, and why was it so impactful?
5.
**Improving the Debate:** What is the single most important
change to the debate protocol or dynamics that could have
prevented this failure? (e.g., different communication rules,
promoting dissident opinions, etc.)
Provide a concise, expert analysis focusing on the *process*
failure.
Figure 13: Prompt Template for Failure Analysis.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Metric
Count
Rate
Total Debates Analyzed
500
100% of total
Failed Debates (System Error)
242
48.4% of total
Breakdown of Failed Debates:
Attributed to Groupthink
144
59.5% of failures
Attributed to Other Causes
79
32.6% of failures
Classification Unsuccessful
19
7.9% of failures
Table 8: Failure Cause Attribution This table shows the cause attribution for LLM-Debate when involving
SLMs.
You are an expert analyst of multi-agent LLM debates. Your goal is
to determine whether the failure primarily involved
groupthink/conformity dynamics. Groupthink indicators include:
early flawed consensus, explicit capitulation to a majority,
social proofing, adopting peers’ answers without critique,
abandoning independent reasoning to match others, or
reinforcing an incorrect majority despite available dissent.
Not-groupthink includes failures due to independent arithmetic
/logic errors, argument complexity/veneer effects without
convergence, or chaotic divergence with no consensus influence
. Return STRICT JSON only, with keys: groupthink (bool),
confidence (float 0-1), reasons (string), cues (array of
strings).
Figure 14: Prompt for Groupthink Classification.
Figure 15 reports the resulting accuracies for two representative SLMs on each dataset. Across
GSM8K, MATH, and HUMANEVAL we observe a strong positive relationship between self-
consistency and accuracy: questions in the high-consistency bin are substantially more likely to be
answered correctly than those in the low-consistency bin. GPQA exhibits a weaker but still positive
correlation. Overall, these results provide empirical support for the link between self-consistency and
correctness assumed in our method.
D.2
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS WITH VOTING-BASED METHODS
Since SLM-MUX also involves voting on model outputs, we examine its differences from standard
self-consistency and Agent Forest to better explain the source of our improvements.
To explain our stronger performance, we note a limitation of self-consistency methods. Suppose
a model has probability p of answering a question correctly. When self-consistency samples N
responses, the probability of obtaining the correct answer after majority voting follows a binomial
distribution:
A(N, p) = Pr
 X ≥
 N
2

=
N
X
k=⌈N/2⌉
N
k

pk(1 −p)N−k,
X ∼Binomial(N, p)
(1)
Table 9: Prompt sensitivity analysis for MoA on MATH. The baseline prompt used in our experiments is already
near-optimal.
Setting
Accuracy
SLM-MUX (Ours)
61.8%
Best Single Model
56.8%
Tuned Prompt (Best)
48.4%
Baseline Prompt (Used in Paper)
46.2%
Tuned Prompt (Average)
41.8%
Tuned Prompt (Worst)
25.8%
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 15: Accuracy as a function of per-question self-consistency score on GSM8K, MATH, GPQA, and
HUMANEVAL. Questions are grouped into three bins by self-consistency: Low [0.0, 0.5), Medium [0.5, 0.8),
and High [0.8, 1.0]. Each line corresponds to a different SLM; legends report the Pearson correlation r between
self-consistency and correctness.
We observe that A(N, p) exceeds p only when p > 0.5, meaning self-consistency is effective only in
this regime. When p < 0.5, self-consistency can actually lower overall accuracy.
For any dataset, we can conceptually divide examples into three types of questions. Type 1: p =
100%, the model always answers correctly. Type 2: p > 50%, the model is more likely than not to be
correct. Type 3: p < 50%, the model is more likely to be wrong. The overall effect of self-consistency
is then the improvement from Type 2, offset by the degradation from Type 3. Improvement occurs
only when the dataset contains a sufficiently large proportion of Type 2 questions.
For SLM-MUX, we select the output from the most confident model, so the accuracy can be
approximated as A(N, pmax), where pmax is the highest probability among the participating models.
By routing to the model with the highest pmax on each question, we effectively enlarge the proportion
of Type 2 questions, leading to higher overall accuracy.
For the Agent Forest approach, answers are drawn evenly from all models, so its accuracy can be
approximated as A(N, ¯p), where ¯p is the average probability across models. This generally results in
lower accuracy than SLM-MUX, as weaker models dilute the signal from stronger ones.
D.3
MODEL SELECTION SEARCH ANALYSIS
D.3.1
SEARCH-SET SIZE STABILITY
We analyze how the size of the search set (number of problems used in the search phase) affects the
resulting model ranking. For each of the three benchmarks MATH, GSM8K, and GPQA, we treat the
full benchmark (approximately 500 problems) as the search pool and first run our search procedure
on the full set to obtain a ranking of all candidate models. We then record the models occupying
Rank 1, Rank 2, and Rank 3 under this full-set ranking.
Next, we subsample the search set to smaller sizes and re-run the search. Specifically, for each dataset
we evaluate search-set sizes of 100, 200, 300, 400, and the full set. At each size, we recompute the
ranking over all models and track the ranks of the three models that were Rank 1–3 under the full-set
setting.
Figure 16 shows the results. Each curve corresponds to one of the Rank 1/2/3 models under the
full-set ranking, and the y-axis reports its rank when the search-set size is changed. Across all three
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
datasets, these models consistently remain within the top three positions even when the search set
is reduced to as few as 100 problems, with only minor swaps in their relative order on MATH and
GSM8K. This suggests that a search set of a few hundred problems is sufficient to stably identify the
top-performing models.
Figure 16: Stability of model rankings with respect to search-set size on MATH, GSM8K, and GPQA. For
each dataset, we first determine the top three models using the full search set and then track their ranks as the
search-set size is reduced.
D.3.2
RANDOM MODEL SELECTION BASELINE
A natural question is whether the performance gains of SLM-MUX stem from the model selection
search or from the orchestration architecture itself. To isolate the contribution of the architecture,
we conduct an experiment where model combinations are selected randomly rather than through our
search procedure.
For each dataset, we randomly sample model combinations of size K = 2, 3, 4 from our pool of
five SLMs and apply SLM-MUX. We compare the resulting accuracy against the best single model
within each random pool. Table 10 reports the average performance across all random combinations.
Table 10: Performance of SLM-MUX with randomly selected model combinations. Even without optimized
model selection, SLM-MUX consistently outperforms the best single model in the pool.
Dataset
K
SLM-MUX (Random)
Best Single Model
∆(Gain)
MATH-500
2
67.2%
66.1%
+1.1
3
71.5%
69.8%
+1.7
4
73.7%
71.8%
+1.9
GSM8K
2
84.1%
81.7%
+2.4
3
87.3%
83.6%
+3.7
4
88.8%
84.0%
+4.8
GPQA
2
43.0%
41.3%
+1.7
3
44.5%
44.4%
+0.1
4
46.3%
46.0%
+0.3
As shown in Table 10, SLM-MUX consistently outperforms the best single model even when the
model combination is selected randomly. On MATH-500 and GSM8K, the gains are substantial (up
to +4.8 on GSM8K with K = 4). On GPQA, where consistency is a weaker signal for correctness,
the gains are smaller but still positive.
To further quantify how often SLM-MUX improves over single models, we compute the Effective
Combination Rate: the percentage of all possible K-model subsets where SLM-MUX outperforms
the best single model in that subset. Table 11 reports the results.
On GSM8K, 100% of combinations are effective across all values of K. On MATH-500 and GPQA,
the effective rate increases with K, reaching 100% at K = 4. Even at K = 2, the majority of
combinations (60–100%) are effective. These results demonstrate that the space of “workable” model
combinations is dense, and one does not need to search extensively to find an effective subset. The
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 11: Effective Combination Rate: percentage of model combinations where SLM-MUX outperforms the
best single model in the subset.
Dataset
K = 2
K = 3
K = 4
MATH-500
70%
100%
100%
GSM8K
100%
100%
100%
GPQA
60%
80%
100%
model selection search provides additional gains by identifying the optimal combination, but the
architecture is robust even without it.
D.4
TEST-SET VALIDATION OF SCALING BEHAVIOR
In Section 3.3, we evaluated the “Adding More Participating Model Types” scaling dimension on the
validation set. Here we report the corresponding results on the test set to verify that the observed
trends generalize.
Table 12 summarizes the test-set accuracy as the number of participating models K increases from 1
to 5. For each value of K, we use the model combination selected by the search procedure described
in Section 3.2. Figure 17 visualizes these results.
Table 12: Test-set accuracy (%) as the number of participating models K increases. For K = 1, the best single
model is reported.
K
GPQA
GSM8K
MATH
1 (best single)
47.98
90.20
78.20
2
50.21
91.51
80.27
3
51.81
91.29
81.09
4
49.16
91.44
81.00
5
45.18
90.80
80.64
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for GPQA
Accuracy
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
89
90
91
92
93
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for GSM8K
Accuracy
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Participating Models
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
Accuracy (%)
Adding More Participating Models for MATH
Accuracy
Figure 17: Test-set accuracy as a function of the number of participating models on GPQA, GSM8K, and MATH.
The trends mirror those observed on the validation set: GPQA peaks at K = 3, GSM8K saturates quickly, and
MATH shows continued improvement up to K = 3.
E
GENERALIZATION OF SLM-MUX
E.1
OPEN-ENDED GENERATION (HUMANEVAL)
In the main text, SLM-MUX is instantiated on tasks with discrete answer spaces, where self-
consistency can be measured via majority voting over sampled outputs. To check whether the
same principle extends to open-ended generation, we apply SLM-MUX to the HUMANEVAL code-
generation benchmark.
Consistency estimator for open-ended generation.. On HUMANEVAL, exact-string majority voting
is not appropriate, so we replace it with a semantic consistency estimator. For each model and
each problem, we sample N = 5 code generations with temperature 0.3. We then encode the 5
generations using the pretrained embedding model Salesforce/codet5p-110m-embedding
and compute pairwise cosine similarities, yielding a 5 × 5 similarity matrix. From this matrix,
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 13: Pass@1 on HUMANEVAL for individual SLMs.
Model
Pass@1
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
0.178
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
0.485
Mistral-Small-24B
0.870
Qwen2.5-Coder-7B
0.893
Table 14: SLM-MUX on HUMANEVAL (Pass@1). Each row corresponds to a pair of SLMs; SLM-MUX
selects the output from the model with higher embedding-based consistency.
Setup
Models combined
SLM-MUX (Pass@1)
Exp 1
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
0.506
Exp 2
Mistral-Small-24B + Qwen2.5-Coder-7B
0.939
we identify the most coherent cluster of generations (of size x) and use x/5 as the model’s self-
consistency score for that problem, analogous to the confidence score derived from majority voting in
the discrete-answer setting.
We also experimented with an LLM-as-a-judge–based consistency estimator (using Qwen2.5-7B-
Instruct as the judge) and found that the embedding-based estimator exhibits a stronger correlation
with ground-truth correctness (Pass@1). All results below therefore use the embedding-based
consistency score.
Results.. Table 13 reports the Pass@1 of each individual SLM on HUMANEVAL. Table 14 reports
the Pass@1 of SLM-MUX when combining two models at a time; for each problem, SLM-MUX
selects the solution from the model with the larger embedding-based consistency score.
E.2
FRONTIER LLMS
We evaluate whether SLM-MUX can exploit complementary strengths between state-of-the-art
frontier models. We pair GPT-4o with Gemini-2.5-Flash and apply SLM-MUX on MATH-500,
GPQA, and GSM8K-500. For each problem, we sample N = 5 responses per model at temperature
0.3 and apply self-consistency routing: for each problem, we perform majority voting within each
model’s samples, then route to the model showing higher agreement.
Table 15 summarizes the results. As a reference, “Perfect Routing” indicates the theoretical upper
bound achievable if the system always selects the correct model when at least one succeeds.
Table 15: SLM-MUX performance when applied to frontier LLMs (GPT-4o and Gemini-2.5-Flash).
Benchmark
GPT-4o
Gemini-2.5-Flash
SLM-MUX
Perfect Routing
MATH-500
73.0%
92.1%
92.8%
94.2%
GPQA
50.7%
51.1%
60.1%
73.7%
GSM8K-500
89.1%
85.7%
89.4%
91.4%
The results reveal two distinct regimes. On GPQA, the two models exhibit complementary error
patterns, and SLM-MUX achieves 60.1% accuracy, surpassing the best single model by nearly 10
percentage points. This demonstrates that SLM-MUX effectively exploits complementary strengths
even at the frontier scale. On MATH and GSM8K, the Perfect Routing bounds (94.2% and 91.4%)
are only marginally higher than the single-model baselines, indicating high overlap in the models’
correct predictions. The limited gains on these benchmarks reflect this ceiling rather than a limitation
of the routing mechanism.
E.3
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC FINE-TUNED MODELS
Domain-specific fine-tuned models are widely deployed in practice. We evaluate whether SLM-
MUX can effectively orchestrate such specialized models by testing on two domains: code generation
and mathematical reasoning.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 16: SLM-MUX performance when orchestrating domain-specific fine-tuned models.
Domain
Benchmark
Best Single Model
SLM-MUX
∆(Gain)
Code Generation
HumanEval
89.3%
93.9%
+4.6
Math Reasoning
MATH-500
58.8%
62.2%
+3.4
For code generation, we pair Qwen2.5-Coder-7B (a code-specialized model) with Mistral-Small-24B
(a general-purpose model) on HumanEval. We use the same embedding-based consistency estimator
described in Section E.1. For mathematical reasoning, we pair DeepSeek-Math-7B-RL (a math-
specialized model) with Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct on MATH-500, using standard majority voting for
consistency estimation. Both experiments sample N = 5 responses per model at temperature 0.3.
As shown in Table 16, SLM-MUX achieves consistent improvements in both domains. On Hu-
manEval, the orchestrated system reaches 93.9% Pass@1, outperforming the code specialist (89.3%)
by 4.6 percentage points. On MATH-500, combining the math specialist with a general-purpose
model yields 62.2% accuracy, a 3.4pp improvement. These results demonstrate that SLM-MUX
generalizes effectively to domain-specific fine-tuned models, successfully capturing complementary
strengths between specialists and generalists.
F
LICENSES FOR DATASETS
The MATH dataset is licensed under the MIT License.
The GPQA dataset is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY
4.0) License.
The GSM8K dataset is licensed under the MIT License.
27