--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
AUTOLIBRA: AGENT METRIC INDUCTION FROM OPEN-
ENDED HUMAN FEEDBACK
Hao Zhu
Phil Cuvin
Xinkai Yu
Charlotte Ka Yee Yan
Jason Zhang
Diyi Yang
Stanford University
University of Toronto
University of Pennsylvania
zhuhao@stanford.edu
Code
Data
Website: https://autolibra.org
ABSTRACT
Agents are predominantly evaluated and optimized via task success metrics, which
are coarse, rely on manual design from experts, and fail to reward intermediate
emergent behaviors. We propose AutoLibra
, a framework for agent evaluation,
that transforms open-ended human feedback e.g. “If you find that the button is
disabled, don’t click it again”, or “This agent has too much autonomy to decide
what to do on its own” into metrics for evaluating fine-grained behaviors in agent
trajectories. AutoLibra accomplishes this by grounding feedback to an agent’s
behavior, clustering similar positive and negative behaviors, and creating con-
crete metrics with clear definitions and concrete examples, which can be used for
prompting LLM-as-a-Judge as evaluators. We further propose two meta-metrics to
evaluate the alignment of a set of (induced) metrics with open feedback: “coverage”
and “redundancy”. Through optimizing these meta-metrics, we experimentally
demonstrate AutoLibra’s ability to induce more concrete agent evaluation metrics
than the ones proposed in previous agent evaluation benchmarks and discover new
metrics to analyze agents. We also present two applications of AutoLibra in agent
improvement: First, we show that AutoLibra serve human prompt engineers for
diagonalize agent failures and improve prompts iterative. Moreover, we find that
AutoLibra can induce metrics for automatic optimization for agents, which makes
agents improve through self-regulation. Our results suggest that AutoLibra is a
powerful task-agnostic tool for evaluating and improving language agents.
1
INTRODUCTION
Humans readily acquire skills from open-ended instructions and feedback from others (Tomasello
et al., 1993). These instructions and feedback are internalized for self-regulated learning (Pintrich &
Zusho, 2002; Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006), providing internal signals for continuous improvement.
Drawing inspiration from this process, we investigate how well AI agents can benefit from open-ended
human feedback through induction of generalizable metrics.
In this paper, we introduce AutoLibra
, a metric induction method, as a novel agent evaluation
framework that mitigates the limitations of current evaluation paradigms. AutoLibra is an evaluation
tool that induces interpretable metrics for AI agents from open-ended human feedback, which can
be collected from end users of AI agents or experts. This offers two advantages: (1) It is much
easier to provide concrete feedback for trajectories than creating metrics, and (2) AutoLibra allows
us to evaluate agents from the perspective of the users. AutoLibra-induced metrics provide concrete
definitions of behaviors that the model-based evaluation method should look for, which could be used
to understand agent behavior, as well as optimization targets to improve agents.
Inspired by the code-theme steps of thematic analysis conducted by experts in social sciences (Braun
& Clarke, 2006), we design the AutoLibra induction process (§2.2) as two steps: (1) feedback
grounding: where we ground every aspect of human feedback on some behavior in the entire agent
trajectory, and (2) behavior clustering: where we cluster the aspects into multiple clusters of similar
behaviors to summarize into metrics. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the user gives a web agent feedback “the
agent did not choose iPhone 14/15” which is grounded to the agent’s behavior, choosing “iPhone 16
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Pro” from the drop-down menu. Similar behaviors are clustered into a common cluster, summarized
as Element Interaction Accuracy.
The AutoLibra evaluation process is designed to provide a closed-loop feedback signal for the
induction process. The agent trajectories used in the induction process are scored by LLM-as-a-Judge
(Zheng et al., 2023) on the induced metrics. The evaluation process (§2.3) then tries to match the
feedback aspects, e.g. “recipe does not contain quinoa”, with the traits, e.g. task-requirement-
achievement. In this way, we can meta-evaluate the quality of the metrics: (i) coverage (what
proportion of feedback aspects can be matched with an agent trait), and (ii) redundancy of the metrics
(what proportion of the detected traits are not mentioned by humans). These two metrics provide
an overall statistical picture of the quality of the induced metrics. Based on these two metrics, we
can search for the set of metrics with the lowest redundancy and the highest coverage. As shown in
§3.1, we find that as the number of metrics increases, the redundancy increases, and the coverage
ultimately converges to the maximum coverage. With AutoLibra, our aim is to answer the following
research questions:
RQ1: How well do AutoLibra’s step-wise results align with human judgment?
RQ2: Does AutoLibra provide insights into agent behavior beyond expert-designed metrics?
RQ3: Can AutoLibra provide optimization signals for improving agents’ performance?
Experiments within multiple agent domains, including collaborative agents (Shao et al., 2024), social
agents (Zhou et al., 2024b), web agents (Zhou et al., 2024a; He et al., 2024), and text game agents
(Paglieri et al., 2024; Cloos et al., 2024), demonstrate that AutoLibra is able to induce fine-grained
and interpretable metrics with high coverage and low redundancy in unseen human feedback with
80 trajectories per dataset annotated with one feedback for each. These metrics are more concrete,
and some of them were even overlooked in expert designed metrics or error analysis (§4). AutoLibra
can iteratively discover new, emergent metrics (§3.2) throughout the agent optimization process, and
provide optimization signals helps improve the performance of frontier LLM in a challenging 2D text
game by over 20% (§5) in 3 stages with only 18 trajectory annotated per stage.
2
AUTOLIBRA
To address the limitations of existing evaluation paradigms, AutoLibra
is designed to meet the
following desiderata: (1) induced from agent behavior: This ensures that metrics are grounded in
agent trajectories rather than predefined by human experts, (2) self-validating: Allows choosing
minimal set of metrics that cover unseen human feedback with sufficient abstraction to be useful
across different tasks, and (3) generalizable: Applicable to various agent environments, independent
of domain-specific design. Based on feedback data collected from humans (§2.1), AutoLibra achieves
these desiderata through a closed-loop pipeline consisting of two processes: Induction Process that
converts agent behaviors and corresponding feedback into metrics, (§2.2) and Evaluation Process
that predicts ratings and quality of new agent behaviors on the induced metrics (§2.3).
2.1
COLLECTING HUMAN FEEDBACK
In this paper, we use human feedback from two groups: (1) End-users – for agents that interact
directly with humans, we use the feedback from the users who interact and converse with the agents.
CoGym (Shao et al., 2024) is the environment that belongs to this category, and we use the user
comments collected in their study, resulting in 197 trajectories with feedback. (2) Experts – for
agents that do not directly interact with humans, we use the feedback from human annotators (five
authors in this paper) who observe agent trajectories. All other environments belong to this category,
these being Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b), WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024a), WebVoyager (He et al.,
2024), Baba-is-ai (Cloos et al., 2024), and MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021). For each trajectory,
we collect only one element of feedback based on the complete agent trajectories.1
Annotators are instructed to explicitly indicate the aspects of agent behavior that they classify as
good or bad, and to avoid general comments such as "The agent is good at solving the task". The
annotators can also choose from a terminal or a web interface; in both cases the annotator is provided
1While in theory we can leverage feedback on specific steps to achieve better feedback grounding and
multiple feedback for single trajectory, we leave it as future work.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
INSTANCE
Could you ﬁnd a recipe with Chicken 
and Quinoa and save it?
Click “Save”
Click “Slow Cooked 
Chicken Stew”
Unseen human feedback.
The agent did not interact with the 
drop-down to choose iPhone 14/15 pro.
AGENT BEHAVIOR
ASPECT
speciﬁc query not supported
Other feedback aspects.
AGENT BEHAVIOR
ASPECT
The agent used the right query.
AGENT BEHAVIOR
ASPECT
The agent did not select the 
iPhone 14 or 15 in the task.
Agent selected iPhone 16 Pro Max.
HUMAN FEEDBACK ASPECT
AGENT BEHAVIOR
ASPECT
clicked product categories ...
did not use the correct 
drop-down for price sorting.
HUMAN FEEDBACK ASPECT
Collect human feedback for 
agent trajectories
Ground feedback into 
aspects
evaluates if the agent interacts 
with the correct UI elements  
Good behaviors show accurate 
targeting of links, buttons, and 
textboxes, bad behaviors ...
METRIC DESCRIPTION
GOOD BEHAVIORS
1. Agent correctly uses the 
search bar to search for news 
related to Brexit.
2. Agent uses the ﬁlter feature 
to check for audio datasets.
3. ...
BAD BEHAVIORS
Other induced metrics.
These metrics are ready to be used
for agent evaluation
Evaluate how much unseen 
human feedback is covered
Element Interaction Accuracy
👉📱
METRIC
Other trajectory-feedback pairs.
craft and reﬁne search queries...
METRIC DESCRIPTION
GOOD BEHAVIORS
BAD BEHAVIORS
🔎✅
Query and Search Strategy
METRIC
Click “All Departments”
Search climbing gear & sort by price.
The agent did the right search, but didn’t 
sort by price.
INSTANCE
Compare the prices and chips for the 
iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro ...
The agent did not interact with the 
drop-down to choose iPhone 14/15 pro.
Click “iPhone” tab 
Click “iPhone 16 Pro Max”
INSTANCE
Induce metrics from aspects
Judgment with LLMs
POSITIVE TRAITS
NEGATIVE TRAITS
NOT APPLICABLE METRICS
🔎✅ Search query is correct.
👉📱     Using the correct buttons...
📑✅ should choose “Chicken w/ ...
🏁💯 recipe not desired w/o quinoa
🚧🛑
🔄🚫
🚶🎯
🏃⏱
TRAITS
Aggregated Feedback Coverage: 82%
Aggregated Metric Redundancy: 75%
Meta Evaluation
Covered by 🏁💯 
recipe by the agent contained no 
chicken breast or quinoa.
META-METRICS
ASPECT
ASPECT
The agent efficiently 
found a recipe.
Not covered
since  🏃⏱ is judged as N/A.
1 out of 2 feedback aspects covered;
3 out of 4 detected traits are redundant
Figure 1: AutoLibra
induces agent evaluation metrics from human feedback, and uses these
metrics to evaluate agents, which can be meta-evaluated via evaluating the coverage on unseen human
feedback. Here we show real examples of agent trajectories, human feedback, aspects, induced
metrics, evaluation results on WebVoyager (He et al., 2024).
with the agent’s task and then view the agent’s observation and actions step by step, in text form.2 For
multi-agent tasks, we annotate each agent’s trajectory in a given interaction separately. For Sotopia
(Zhou et al., 2024b), WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024a), and WebVoyager (He et al., 2024), we annotate
100 trajectories of agents based on GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) with feedback for each dataset. For
experiments in §5 we annotate 18 trajectories for each dataset in each iteration. The annotation
process is fast: Human annotators spend less than 5 minutes to provide feedback for each trajectory;
§4, we randomly hold out 20% of the trajectories for validation.
2While viewing screenshots is standard for web navigation tasks, we keep the observation format consistent
across agents and humans to encourage more grounded feedback.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2.2
INDUCTION PROCESS
Feedback Grounding The feedback of human annotators can contain multiple aspects; e.g. “AI
agent was pretty good at giving me a consistent itinerary and vacation plan, although it froze on the
last couple of minutes.”, collected from human annotators in CoGym (Shao et al., 2024), contains a
positive aspect about the agent’s ability to generate a consistent itinerary, and a negative aspect about
the agent freezing at the end. Here we define an aspect as a triple (behavior, feedback, sign).
In the positive aspect of the previous example, the behavior is the agent’s actions to create a
20-day itinerary for the Maldives, the feedback is that the created itinerary is consistent and the
sign is positive. This grounding procedure is similar to the coding procedure in thematic analysis.
We feed the trajectory and the feedback into the LLM (we use GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) as it
yields good results in our pilot experiments) and prompt the LLM with the following instructions: (1)
break down the feedback into bullet points; (2) for each bullet point, find the corresponding part of
the trajectory to which the feedback refers. Finally, we use constrained decoding to force GPT-4o to
output the aspects in the previous format. In our experiments, we find that on most datasets, for each
trajectory, the LLM can generate one to five aspects, with a mean of one to two aspects.
Behavior Clustering
The second step of the extraction process is to group the aspects into N
metrics. To illustrate this step, we consider another example in the same dataset “The AI responds
quickly to write and run the Python script“ where the behavior is the agent’s action to quickly
write and run a Python script, the feedback is that the agent responds quickly, and the sign
is positive. Although this aspect is a positive aspect, it reflects the same dimension of the agent’s
behavior as the previous negative aspect, with an opposite value. Each metric is a cluster of aspects,
with a definition summarizing the criteria of positive behaviors, a list of positive behavior examples,
and a list of negative behavior examples. This clustering procedure is similar to the theme induction
step in thematic analysis.
However, clustering similar agent behaviors together is challenging for statistical clustering methods.3
Inspired by LLM-based semantic clustering and concept induction methods (Viswanathan et al., 2024;
Lam et al., 2024), we prompt an LLM (o3-mini high4, as it produces the most accurate coverage
and redundancy scores as evaluated later) to cluster the aspects into metrics. As illustrated in Fig. 7,
we gather all the aspects of M trajectories and cluster into N metrics, where N is a parameter set
through the optimization process (§3.1). We provide the LLM with the following instructions: The
granularity of the grouping should be minimal; only very similar behaviors are grouped together;
but don’t limit to one particular website or one particular character, which empirically makes the
metrics more concrete but still applicable across different tasks.
2.3
EVALUATION PROCESS
Evaluating agents with induced metrics
LLM-as-a-Judge (Zheng et al., 2023), or more broadly,
model-based evaluation (Zhang et al., 2019; Celikyilmaz et al., 2021) is a method to use machine
learning models to evaluate the output of other machine learning models. The success of LLM-as-a-
Judge depends on the gap between the difficulty of evaluation or verification and that of generation
and action. In agentic tasks, this gap is often large, as the policy model must perform multiple
steps in decision-making, while the evaluation model must only classify the trajectories, which
make LLM-as-a-Judge widely used (Zhou et al., 2024a; He et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024b). In
AutoLibra, we employ LLM-as-a-Judge to evaluate the agent trajectories configured with the induced
metrics. However, LLM-as-a-Judge can be replaced by any other evaluation methods implementing
the induced metrics; e.g. an interact-valid-element metric could be evaluated by a rule-
based evaluator that checks if the agent interacts with valid elements on the webpage. Wenote that
AutoLibra could be used with other evaluation methods, such as programmatic evaluation (Ma et al.,
2024); we leave generating programs for the induced metrics for future work.
As illustrated in Fig. 8, taking the induced metrics as input, an LLM (we use o3-mini medium, as
it provides similar results in this step to o3-mini high) is prompted to rate the agent trajectories to
3In preliminary experiments, we tried to use K-means clustering on the aspect vectors generated by embedding
model text-embedding-3-large, but the clusters are mostly based on tasks and not on the behaviors.
4https://openai.com/index/openai-o3-mini/
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
{+ 1, -1, N/A} for each metric. For an agent trajectory, the metrics labeled +1 are the positive traits,
and the ones labeled -1 are the negative traits. When we calculate the scores of the metrics, we
use the ratio of agent trajectories rated as positive to the ones that are rated as positive or negative,
ignoring those rated as N/A, since not all metrics are applicable to all trajectories (some metrics like
valid-search-terms are only applicable when the task involves searching).
Meta evaluation
The final loop component is the meta-evaluation, i.e. evaluating the evaluation
metrics induced by AutoLibra. This step matches the traits detected by the LLM-as-a-Judge with as-
pects grounded from the human feedback. The goal is to verify whether (1) the induced metrics cover
the behaviors the human annotators care about, and (2) LLM-as-a-Judge can produce accurate evalua-
tion results based on the induced metrics. In the previous example, if the respond-promptly is
extracted as a metric, and the LLM-as-a-Judge has the same opinion as the human annotators, then
this aspect is considered as successfully covered. If either a similar metric was not extracted, or the
LLM-as-a-Judge assigns a different score, then this aspect is considered as not covered.
INDUCTION
Metric 
Description
Good 
Behaviors
Bad 
Behaviors
Trajectory
Feedback
EVALUATION
Coverage
Redundancy
MIN
MAX
Figure 2: Metric optimization: optimizing the in-
duction process through maximizing the coverage
while minimizing redundancy of the metrics, cal-
culated via the evaluation process.
As illustrated in Fig.
9, we perform meta-
evaluation for each trajectory-feedback pair by
classifying the aspects into positive and nega-
tive aspects, classifying traits into positive and
negative traits based on rating, then matching
the positive aspects with positive traits and the
negative aspects with negative traits. We prompt
an LLM (we use GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024))
with a list of aspects and another list of traits and
ask the LLM to find the best matching trait for
each aspect or decide that there is no matching
trait. The coverage of the whole dataset is calculated as the proportion of aspects of all instances that
have a matching trait, and the redundancy is calculated as the proportion of traits of all instances that
have not been matched with any aspect.
3
OPTIMIZING AND VALIDATING AUTOLIBRA
AutoLibra is designed to be self-validating through the evaluation process, which allows us to search
the optimal set of metrics that cover the human opinion the best (§3.1). This optimization process can
also be applied iteratively throughout the agent improvement process. As the agent is optimized, new
metrics can be added to existing metrics (§3.2), which is similar to how unit tests are kept throughout
software development to prevent new features from interfere with existing features. In the last part of
this section, we study the alignment between each step of AutoLibra and human judgment.
3.1
METRIC OPTIMIZATION
Illustrated in Fig. 2, we optimize the metric induction process to maximize coverage and minimize
redundancy. Among the two, we prioritize coverage of the metrics to provide a comprehensive
evaluation of the agent behavior, while minimizing overlap within the metrics to avoid redundancy,
thus maximizing the utility of induced metrics. To optimize for this objective, we generate 20 different
sets of metrics, with metric count N ranging from 4 to 13, and calculate the coverage and redundancy
of the metrics in human feedback. We then select metrics with a coverage of at least the highest
coverage minus 1%, and the lowest redundancy. This is performed iteratively, by resetting the range
of N to the number of metrics selected previously ±2, repeating until the coverage and redundancy
of the selected metrics converge, normally within 3 iterations. While this optimization process is
simple, experiments with various other optimization strategies, including genetic algorithms and
iterative clustering saw none of them yield better results than the simple strategy. Fig. 3 shows the
highest coverages of the metrics of size N, which converge around N = 6 to 10 depending on the
datasets. The best coverage on Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b) is the lowest among all four datasets,
60%, likely due to the diversity of the tasks in the dataset, while coverage on WebArena (Zhou et al.,
2024a) and WebVoyager (He et al., 2024) are the highest, 88%. We also find that the coverage of the
held-out trajectories is only slightly worse (< 5%) than the trajectories we use to induce the metrics,
which is expected since we use the exact examples extracted from the latter. Lastly, we show that the
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
good and bad behaviors are crucial in the metrics, dropping which resulting in up to 30% coverage
decrease on CoGym.
3.2
ITERATIVE METRIC INDUCTION
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
Coverage
CoGym
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
Sotopia
0.4
0.6
0.8
Redundancy
0.4
0.6
0.8
Coverage
WebArena
0.4
0.6
0.8
Redundancy
0.4
0.6
0.8
WebVoyager
N
2
4
6
8
10
12
Figure 3: Coverage and redundancy of AutoLi-
bra metrics on four agentic datasets. Circles indi-
cate coverage and redundancy for different induced
metrics; stars indicate the the best metrics’ cover-
age and redundancy on held-out human feedback;
squares show an ablation test, indicating the ef-
fect when good and bad behavior examples are
removed from metrics, demonstrating the critical-
ity of concrete behavior examples
When applying AutoLibra to agent optimization,
we can iteratively induce new metrics, as agents
develop new failure modes or new behaviors
as they improve, which is useful for tracking
agents’ progress across different iterations.5 To
do this, we modify the behavior clustering step:
we provide the LLM with the existing metrics
and definitions, asking the LLM not to change
the definitions of the existing metrics, to only
add new behaviors to the existing metrics, and
to add new metrics if necessary. We apply the
same optimization strategy as in the metric opti-
mization step ensure the newly induced metrics
cover emerging behaviors and do not overlap
with existing metrics.
3.3
HOW ALIGNED ARE THE STEPS
IN AUTOLIBRA WITH HUMAN JUDGMENT?
Since AutoLibra uses LLMs in each step, we
first ask whether LLM outputs are reliable or
aligned with human judgment.
To measure
the alignment of AutoLibra metric induction
with human judgment, we validate the feedback
grounding, agent evaluation, and meta evaluation steps by having human experts manually review
each step (with exception of the behavior clustering step, as it is prohibitively time-intensive for
human annotators to process and cluster more than 400 aspects), scoring (1/0) based on whether they
agree with the outcomes of each iteration. The coverage and redundancy scores, in combination with
the validation results of the other steps in the loop, thus serve as an indirect validation for the behavior
clustering step. Table 1 shows the agreement rate of human annotators in AutoLibra steps. It should
be noted that these tasks are significantly different; e.g., grounding for WebVoyager (He et al., 2024)
is challenging due to the length and wide action space of the trajectory, and LLM-as-a-Judge for
Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b) is difficult due to the complexity of the evaluation of social interactions.
Our results show that the majority (significantly over 85%) of results in AutoLibra are reliable
according to human validation.
5Alternatively, a new set of metrics can be induced from scratch for each iteration - in practice, we do not
find that this results in any coverage loss, but we choose the former method for consistency
Table 1: The ratio of instances marked as fully correct in human validation. For each step and each
task, we randomly sample 40 instances to reach a relatively small confidence interval of 0.04 and ask
human annotators to label them as completely correct or not. Although the agreement scores vary
across tasks and steps, the average agreement for each step and dataset is above 0.85 significantly.
Steps
CoGym
Sotopia
WebArena
WebVoyager
Baba-is-AI
Average
Grounding
0.95
0.95
0.98
0.93
0.93
0.95 (±0.03)
LLM-as-a-Judge
0.90
0.85
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.92 (±0.04)
Meta-Evaluation
0.98
0.90
0.85
0.83
0.95
0.90 (±0.04)
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 2: AutoLibra-induced metrics and expert-proposed evaluation dimensions and failure categories.
(Percentage %) denotes failure frequency or score from AutoLibra or the original papers.
AutoLibra
-induced metrics
Failure categories by experts
CoGym (Shao et al., 2024)
Matched metrics and failure categories
Responsiveness and Efficiency (75%)
Communication Clarity & Notification (8%)
Communication (65%)
Instruction Adherence & Follow-Through (24%)
Situational Awareness (40%)
Iterative Refinement and Adaptability (47%)
Autonomy and Proactiveness (28%)
Planning (39%)
Content Quality and Coherence (16%)
Search and Retrieval Accuracy (13%)
Data Analysis Competence (2%)
Environmental Awareness (28%)
Interface and User Experience (23%)
Personalization (16%)
Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b)
Matched metrics and social dimensions
Goal Achievement & Outcome Effectiveness (19%)
Goal Completion (14%)
Conversational Naturalness & Efficiency (5%)
Personality Consistency and Alignment (2%)
Contextual Integration of Identity (1%)
Believability (4%)
Unmatched AutoLibra
-induced metrics
Negotiation Tactics and Strategic Adaptability (14%), Responsiveness and Conversational Termination
(5%), Adaptability and Flexibility in Dialogue (7%)
Unmatched Sotopia-Eval dimensions
Relationship, Knowledge, Secret, Financial and Material Benefits, Social Rules
WebVoyager (He et al., 2024)
Matched metrics and failure reasons
Error Recovery & Adjustment (15%)
Step Efficiency & Action Redundancy (13%)
Navigation Accuracy (11%)
Access Barrier Handling (2%)
Navigation Stuck (44%)
Information & Verification Accuracy (16%)
Hallucination (22%)
Result Relevance Accuracy (9%)
Prompt Misalignment (9%)
Unmatched AutoLibra
-induced metrics
Query and Search Strategy Efficiency (7%), Final Output and Summarization Quality (18%)
Unmatched WebVoyager fail reasons
Visual Grounding Issue (25%)
4
AUTOLIBRA AS A LENS
: AGENT EVALUATION WITH AUTOLIBRA
In this section, we use AutoLibra as a lens to provide grounded, behavior-salient insights into
agent trajectories. In three data sets, CoGym (Shao et al., 2024), Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b), and
WebVoyager (He et al., 2024), we compare induced metrics with heuristically proposed evaluation
dimensions and failure modes summarized by the authors. We find that AutoLibra can discover
more concrete metrics than heuristically defined categories, and novel metrics that are overlooked
by experts. Tab. 2 summarizes the comparison between AutoLibra-induced metrics and evaluation
criteria across the three aforementioned datasets.
CoGym
For CoGym (Shao et al., 2024), AutoLibra induces 9 metrics from feedback from end
users, which can correspond to the five failure categories proposed by the authors. The failure rate
(frequency of a metric score of -1) measured by AutoLibra also roughly matches the failure rate of the
manually labeled CoGym categories by the authors. This shows that AutoLibra induces metrics that
reflect human-expert categorization and provide an automated measurement of agent failures.
Sotopia
Sotopia (Zhou et al., 2024b) proposed 7 dimensions for evaluating social intelligence in
AI agents. With AutoLibra, we recover the exact dimension Goal Completion, and 3 metrics as the
subdimensions of Believability, indicating that Believability could be too high-level, while AutoLibra
provides more concrete breakdown metrics. The failure rate (frequency of a score of -1 metric rating,
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
indicating the agent performs poorly on that metric) measured by AutoLibra in these two categories
roughly matches the score of the Sotopia dimensions of the agent we studied. AutoLibra induces
another four metrics overlooked in the heuristically proposed Sotopia-Eval dimensions. We note that
the other five dimensions in Sotopia are still valuable evaluation dimensions for social intelligence.
However, behaviors captured by dimensions Financial and Material Benefits, Knowledge, and Secret
are often also captured by Goal Completion and Believability. As a result, AutoLibra produces
the single Goal Achievement and Outcome Effectiveness by minimizing redundancy. Whereas,
Relationship and Social Rules captures long-tailed behaviors not captured by AutoLibra.
WebVoyager
Similarly, for web navigation tasks, AutoLibra also discovers metrics such as Access
Barrier Handling, Error Recovery and Adjustment, Step Efficiency and Action Redundancy, and
Navigation Accuracy, which much more closely reflect concrete agent behavior than the failure
analysis categories proposed in previous work (He et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024c), where they
are often simply classified as “navigation stuck”. We also find additional metrics that are not
mentioned in the failure analysis, such as Query and Search Strategy Efficiency and Final Output
and Summarization Quality, which are frequent issues (with frequencies of 7% and 18%). Since
AutoLibra only observes the behavior of the agents, it cannot interpret the neural representation, not
able to capture the visual grounding issues, which are mentioned in the WebVoyager paper. This
further demonstrates AutoLibra’s utility in extracting behavior-salient metrics, and particularly its
ability to obtain fine-grained metrics that expert design would not have been able to extract.
5
AUTOLIBRA AS A LADDER
: AGENT IMPROVEMENT WITH AUTOLIBRA
Inducing 5 metrics
Inducing another
5 metrics
Inducing another 1 metric
Showing awareness of
the map boundary
when forming new rules
Forming win conditions
consistently
Forming
self-referential
rules
Overthinking
Performance dip
Humans provide feedback
before each stage
Success Rate
Iterations
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1 Metrics
Stage 2 Metrics
Stage 3 Metrics
Cum. Avg.
40
50
60
70
Performance, %
Figure 4: AutoLibra iteratively induce metrics and improves
the agent prompts through optimizing for the induced metrics.
Although not optimized for, the success rate of the agent
continuously improve until Stage 3, when the agent begins
to overthink.
As AutoLibra can automatically in-
duce metrics from human feedback,
a natural question to ask is whether
it can enable self-regulated improve-
ment in agents through iterative feed-
back. This can be achieved through
optimizing the agent prompts towards
higher scores on the metrics ex-
tracted by AutoLibra. To answer this
question, we use a challenging 2D
game Baba-Is-AI (Cloos et al., 2024;
Paglieri et al., 2024) as a benchmark.
Inspired by Baba-Is-You, this game
requires not only following rules to
achieve goals, but also manipulating
the rules, even self-referential ones.
For example, in the game illustrated
in Fig. 5, the agent needs to change
self-referential rules from baba is you,
to door is you to control the green
door on the other side of the wall, form a new win rule ball is win, and navigate to the red ball to
achieve the win condition. To achieve a high score on this dataset, the agent needs not only planning,
but also metacognitive skills, which is very challenging for LLM agents with frontier models as shown
in the Balrog benchmark (Paglieri et al., 2024). In this experiment, we use Gemini-2.5-Flash (Team
et al., 2025) for the agent, AutoLibra, and agent prompt optimization, throughout the experiment,
which will be referred as the LLM in this section. Gemini-2.5-Flash is ranked as the 3rd place, with a
success rate of 50.8% ± 4.6% on the Balrog leaderboard for Baba-is-AI at the time of submission,
and the state-of-the-art result is 56.7% ± 4.5%. We chose this model due to the tradeoff between the
cost and the performance.
Fig. 4 illustrated our procedure, and summarized the results. In this experiment, we employ an
iterative process by improving the agents in 3 stages through providing human feedback on 6 out of
40 tasks in the Baba-Is-AI (Paglieri et al., 2024) benchmark. In this way, we can study if the feedback
provided for training tasks can be generalized to unseen tasks.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1
2
3
Control the 
door after 1.
This is “baba”
Change iden-
tity to door
Touch the 
ball to win
Figure 5: Example of Baba-Is-AI game.
Before each stage we show human annotators
3 trajectories per task for the 6 tasks, gather the
feedback, and apply AutoLibra iterative met-
ric induction process (§3.2). This results in 5
metrics for Stage 1 and 2, and another 1 metric
for Stage 3. Within each stage, we iteratively
feed 1 LLM agent trajectory on each of these
6 tasks, together with evaluation results based
on these AutoLibra-induced metrics to the LLM
to improve the prompt of the LLM agent. This
process results in continuous improvement not
only on the running maximum metric scores,
the cumulative average metrics, but also game
success rate. Fig. 4 shows these statistics on the
whole 40 tasks, although we only use 6 out of the 40 tasks in the whole optimization process. Upon
examining the agent trajectories, we find the skills learned in the process. In the first stage, the agent
learns to find rules to form based on the map boundary, which could be a result of an induced metric
map-n-constraint-recognition. Similarly, more advanced skills are learned in Stage 2
and 3, including forming win conditions and self-referential rules, probably as a result of metric
rule-manipulation-proficiency.
Our results show that the metrics induced by AutoLibra form effective objectives for improving the
agents through prompt optimization. It should note that AutoLibra is a metric induction method, which
is orthogonal to learning algorithms, including prompt optimization, fine-tuning or reinforcement
learning. We show that this process improves agent success rate by 20% without optimizing for
success rate, and in the future, researchers can study the effect of employing other learning algorithm.
6
RELATED WORK
AutoLibra unifies three areas of research: it draws inspiration from thematic analysis to create nautral
language-derived evaluation metrics to evaluate and reward AI agents.
Evaluating AI agents Much of the work in AI agent evaluation focuses around benchmarks which
contains both task suites and evaluation metrics. In addition to the datasets we used in this paper, SWE-
Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) uses human-written unit tests as evaluation metrics; Embodied Agent
Interface (Li et al., 2024) provides fine-grained evaluation for LLM-based embodied agents; τ-Bench
(Yao et al., 2024) compares database states for evaluation; concurrent work AgentRewardBench (Lù
et al., 2025) builds a benchmark for reward models for web agents. Recently, there are observatory
tools including Galileo (Galileo, 2025), Vertex AI Gen AI (Cloud, 2025), and Docent (Meng et al.,
2025) which provide user interfaces to visualize agent failure modes. Generating intrinsic rewards
have also been studied in the reinforcement learning community (Du et al., 2019; Pathak et al., 2017;
Laskin et al., 2022) to encourage exploration, sub-task completion, or skill discovery. In contrast to
these, AutoLibra is a pure data-driven task-agnostic method without predefined failure taxonomy for
generating interpretable metrics for agents.
Learning from natural language and human feedback Researchers have been studying reinforce-
ment learning with language feedback to provide a dense reward to agents (Goyal et al., 2019). Since
LLM agents are even harder to train with sparse reward, there is substantial interest in training LLM
agents from natural language feedback. Chen et al. (2024) propose an imitation learning method
for learning from human feedback; Text2Reward (Xie et al., 2024) uses code generation to generate
robot reward functions from open-ended human feedback; Chen et al. (2025) uses feedback to the
improvement agent policy with prompting and then align the unprompted agent policy with the
prompted one; Shi et al. (2024) propose a new model architecture to incorporate human feedback into
policy learning. On the other hand, human non-open-ended feedback is also incorporated in training
agents, including rating feedback (Nguyen et al., 2017), preference feedback (Christiano et al., 2017),
demonstrative feedback (Shaikh et al., 2025). Unlike these papers, AutoLibra induces metrics from
feedback from all annotated instances and generates metrics that are generalizable to different tasks
and useful for both evaluation and agent fine-tuning.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Thematic analysis Thematic analysis is a powerful tool for qualitative study through coding and
iterative creation of themes. Gauthier & Wallace (2022) provide computational tools to aid this
process; Hong et al. (2022) and Gebreegziabher et al. (2023) explore human-AI collaboration in
thematic analysis; LLooM (Lam et al., 2024), an automatic method for concept induction, closly
aligns with and informs our approach. This paper completes the loop of concept induction by using
the meta-evaluation step to optimize the induced metrics, and apply it to agent evaluation.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work introduces AutoLibra, a new paradigm for agent evaluation, one of the first works to
explore adaptable trajectory-derived evaluation heuristics, offering substantial advantages in agent
training over traditional end-to-end evaluation. We find that this framework is generalizable to
a diverse range of agent tasks, provides new insights into agent behaviors, and identifies strong
optimization targets for agent improvement. There are a few directions for further extending and
applying this framework. (1) Behavior-centric evaluation AutoLibra leads a paradigm shift from
end-to-end agent evaluation (analogous to “integration tests” in software development) to evaluation
with granular metrics that measure agents’ concrete behaviors (analogous to “unit tests”). Future
work can study whether this process can be improved through better human-AI collaboration. (2)
Sub-trajectory feedback from humans In AutoLibra, we label each trajectory with one piece of
feedback, and ground it into the agents’ concrete behavior which is at the sub-trajectory level. In
the future, researchers can let users directly give feedback for one or multiple steps in the trajectory,
which should lead to better feedback grounding results. Similarly, user feedback can be collected
during the interaction instead of after the agent has completed the tasks, which is a more user-friendly
way to gather high quality feedback data. (3) Wider exploration of agent improvement methods In
this paper, we only explored non-parametric for agent improvement to show the utility of AutoLibra.
Future work can use AutoLibra to provide dense rewards for individual steps, and use reinforcement
learning to train agents with these dense rewards.
8
THE BIGGER PICTURE
Humans learn not only from their own experience, but crucially from collective knowledge transmitted
through social interaction (Tomasello et al., 1993). This capacity for social learning and teaching
enables knowledge accumulation across generations, allowing us to build upon rather than reinvent
skills and artifacts (Humphrey, 1976). At the core of this capability lies a distinctive form of
intelligence that sets humans apart from species lacking cumulative culture: social intelligence. A
fundamental question emerges: how can we leverage this social intelligence to enable AI agents to
learn from humans and potentially teach them in similar ways?
Current training paradigms for language agents predominantly focus on behavior cloning or reinforce-
ment learning from self-generated experience. However, behavior cloning has inherent limitations
for skill acquisition. First, it requires teachers or demonstrators to operate in the same environment
as the learning agent, constraining the scalability of knowledge transfer. Second, agents learning
from one or a few demonstrations may develop misunderstandings about what constitutes appropriate
behavior. In such cases, explicit verbal feedback from teachers becomes crucial for establishing the
boundaries of acceptable behaviors and clarifying underlying principles that cannot be easily inferred
from demonstrations alone.
AutoLibra offers a computational approach to address these limitations by incorporating the verbal
feedback that humans naturally exchange in daily interactions to systematically improve agent
behavior. Looking forward, the broader vision is to deploy AI agents in real-world settings where
they can learn from diverse human feedback at scale. This approach could enable agents to acquire
skills from the collective experience of all users, forming both general competencies and specialized
skill sets at personal and organizational levels, mirroring how human communities accumulate and
share knowledge.
Going one step further, such agents could serve as intermediaries for accelerating skill and culture
transmission between humans themselves—distilling expertise from proficient users into interpretable
metrics and actionable feedback that can guide novices, thereby compressing traditional learning
curves and democratizing access to specialized knowledge.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by ONR grant N000142412532, and NSF grant IIS-2247357, and DARPA
grant Friction for Accountability in Conversational Transactions. We thank Google Cloud Platform
and Modal Platform for their credits. We thank Yutong Zhang, Hayley Zhang, Yijia Shao, Michelle
S Lam, Manling Li, Ryan Louie, Yanzhe Zhang, Xuhui Zhou, Maarten Sap, Sherry Tongshuang
Wu, Shikhar Murty, Saujas Vaduguru, Chenghao Yang, Xizhi Xiao, Anant Sinha and all members of
Stanford SALT Lab for their help and feedback throughout this project.
REFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology, 3(2):77–101, 2006.
Asli Celikyilmaz, Elizabeth Clark, and Jianfeng Gao. Evaluation of text generation: A survey, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.14799.
Angelica Chen, Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Tomasz Korbak, Jun Shern Chan, Samuel R.
Bowman, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan Perez. Learning from natural language feedback. Transac-
tions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=xo3hI5MwvU.
Wentse Chen, Jiayu Chen, Fahim Tajwar, Hao Zhu, Xintong Duan, Russ Salakhutdinov, and Jeff
Schneider. Fine-tuning llm agents with retrospective in-context online learning. In Adaptive
Foundation Models: Evolving AI for Personalized and Efficient Learning, 2025.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
Nathan Cloos, Meagan Jens, Michelangelo Naim, Yen-Ling Kuo, Ignacio Cases, Andrei Barbu,
and Christopher J. Cueva. Baba is ai: Break the rules to beat the benchmark, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13729.
Google Cloud.
Introducing agent evaluation in vertex ai gen ai evaluation service, 2025.
URL
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/
introducing-agent-evaluation-in-vertex-ai-gen-ai-evaluation-service.
Accessed: 2025-04-24.
Yali Du, Lei Han, Meng Fang, Ji Liu, Tianhong Dai, and Dacheng Tao. Liir: Learning individual
intrinsic reward in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 32, 2019.
Galileo. Introducing agentic evaluations, 2025. URL https://www.galileo.ai/blog/
introducing-agentic-evaluations. Accessed: 2025-04-24.
Robert P Gauthier and James R Wallace. The computational thematic analysis toolkit. Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 6(GROUP):1–15, 2022.
Simret Araya Gebreegziabher, Zheng Zhang, Xiaohang Tang, Yihao Meng, Elena L Glassman, and
Toby Jia-Jun Li. Patat: Human-ai collaborative qualitative coding with explainable interactive rule
synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1–19, 2023.
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond J Mooney. Using natural language for reward shaping
in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp. 2385–2391, 2019.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan,
and Dong Yu. Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models. In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pp. 6864–6890, 2024.
Matt-Heun Hong, Lauren A Marsh, Jessica L Feuston, Janet Ruppert, Jed R Brubaker, and Danielle Al-
bers Szafir. Scholastic: Graphical human-ai collaboration for inductive and interpretive text analysis.
In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
pp. 1–12, 2022.
Nicholas K Humphrey. The social function of intellect. In Growing points in ethology, pp. 303–317.
Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Michelle S Lam, Janice Teoh, James A Landay, Jeffrey Heer, and Michael S Bernstein. Concept
induction: Analyzing unstructured text with high-level concepts using lloom. In Proceedings of
the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–28, 2024.
Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel. Cic:
Contrastive intrinsic control for unsupervised skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00161,
2022.
Manling Li, Shiyu Zhao, Qineng Wang, Kangrui Wang, Yu Zhou, Sanjana Srivastava, Cem Gokmen,
Tony Lee, Erran Li Li, Ruohan Zhang, et al. Embodied agent interface: Benchmarking llms for
embodied decision making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:100428–
100534, 2024.
Xing Han Lù, Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Nicholas Meade, Arkil Patel, Dongchan Shin, Alejandra
Zambrano, Karolina Sta´nczak, Peter Shaw, Christopher J. Pal, and Siva Reddy. Agentrewardbench:
Evaluating automatic evaluations of web agent trajectories, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2504.08942.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayaraman,
Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding
large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
Kevin Meng, Vincent Huang, Jacob Steinhardt, and Sarah Schwettmann. Introducing docent. https:
//transluce.org/introducing-docent, March 2025.
Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural
machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1464–1474, 2017.
David J Nicol and Debra Macfarlane-Dick. Formative assessment and self-regulated learning: a
model and seven principles of good feedback practice. Studies in Higher Education, 31(2):199–218,
April 2006.
OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan
Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛adry, Alex Baker-
Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex
Paino, Alex Renzin, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Kirillov, Alexi Christakis, Alexis Conneau,
Ali Kamali, Allan Jabri, Allison Moyer, Allison Tam, Amadou Crookes, Amin Tootoochian,
Amin Tootoonchian, Ananya Kumar, Andrea Vallone, Andrej Karpathy, Andrew Braunstein,
Andrew Cann, Andrew Codispoti, Andrew Galu, Andrew Kondrich, Andrew Tulloch, Andrey
Mishchenko, Angela Baek, Angela Jiang, Antoine Pelisse, Antonia Woodford, Anuj Gosalia,
Arka Dhar, Ashley Pantuliano, Avi Nayak, Avital Oliver, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben
Leimberger, Ben Rossen, Ben Sokolowsky, Ben Wang, Benjamin Zweig, Beth Hoover, Blake
Samic, Bob McGrew, Bobby Spero, Bogo Giertler, Bowen Cheng, Brad Lightcap, Brandon
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Walkin, Brendan Quinn, Brian Guarraci, Brian Hsu, Bright Kellogg, Brydon Eastman, Camillo
Lugaresi, Carroll Wainwright, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Casey Chu, Chad Nelson, Chak Li,
Chan Jun Shern, Channing Conger, Charlotte Barette, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Cheng Lu,
Chong Zhang, Chris Beaumont, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Christian Gibson, Christina Kim,
Christine Choi, Christine McLeavey, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clemens Winter, Coley
Czarnecki, Colin Jarvis, Colin Wei, Constantin Koumouzelis, Dane Sherburn, Daniel Kappler,
Daniel Levin, Daniel Levy, David Carr, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, David Sasaki,
Denny Jin, Dev Valladares, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Duc Phong Nguyen, Duncan Findlay,
Edede Oiwoh, Edmund Wong, Ehsan Asdar, Elizabeth Proehl, Elizabeth Yang, Eric Antonow, Eric
Kramer, Eric Peterson, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Eugene Brevdo, Evan Mays, Farzad Khorasani,
Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Francis Zhang, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Gabriel Goh,
Gene Oden, Geoff Salmon, Giulio Starace, Greg Brockman, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Haitang
Hu, Hannah Wong, Haoyu Wang, Heather Schmidt, Heather Whitney, Heewoo Jun, Hendrik
Kirchner, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Hongyu Ren, Huiwen Chang, Hyung Won Chung,
Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Okuyucu,
Ikai Lan, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jacob Coxon,
Jacob Menick, Jakub Pachocki, James Aung, James Betker, James Crooks, James Lennon, Jamie
Kiros, Jan Leike, Jane Park, Jason Kwon, Jason Phang, Jason Teplitz, Jason Wei, Jason Wolfe,
Jay Chen, Jeff Harris, Jenia Varavva, Jessica Gan Lee, Jessica Shieh, Ji Lin, Jiahui Yu, Jiayi
Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joanne Jang, Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Joe Beutler, Joe Landers,
Joel Parish, Johannes Heidecke, John Schulman, Jonathan Lachman, Jonathan McKay, Jonathan
Uesato, Jonathan Ward, Jong Wook Kim, Joost Huizinga, Jordan Sitkin, Jos Kraaijeveld, Josh
Gross, Josh Kaplan, Josh Snyder, Joshua Achiam, Joy Jiao, Joyce Lee, Juntang Zhuang, Justyn
Harriman, Kai Fricke, Kai Hayashi, Karan Singhal, Katy Shi, Kavin Karthik, Kayla Wood, Kendra
Rimbach, Kenny Hsu, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Button, Kevin Liu, Kiel Howe,
Krithika Muthukumar, Kyle Luther, Lama Ahmad, Larry Kai, Lauren Itow, Lauren Workman,
Leher Pathak, Leo Chen, Li Jing, Lia Guy, Liam Fedus, Liang Zhou, Lien Mamitsuka, Lilian Weng,
Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Long Ouyang, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lukas Kondraciuk,
Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Hewitt, Luke Metz, Lyric Doshi, Mada Aflak, Maddie Simens, Madelaine
Boyd, Madeleine Thompson, Marat Dukhan, Mark Chen, Mark Gray, Mark Hudnall, Marvin
Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Mateusz Litwin, Matthew Zeng, Max Johnson, Maya Shetty, Mayank
Gupta, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz, Meng Jia Yang, Mengchao Zhong, Mia Glaese, Mianna
Chen, Michael Janner, Michael Lampe, Michael Petrov, Michael Wu, Michele Wang, Michelle
Fradin, Michelle Pokrass, Miguel Castro, Miguel Oom Temudo de Castro, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles
Brundage, Miles Wang, Minal Khan, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Murat Yesildal, Nacho
Soto, Natalia Gimelshein, Natalie Cone, Natalie Staudacher, Natalie Summers, Natan LaFontaine,
Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nick Stathas, Nick Turley, Nik Tezak, Niko Felix, Nithanth Kudige,
Nitish Keskar, Noah Deutsch, Noel Bundick, Nora Puckett, Ofir Nachum, Ola Okelola, Oleg Boiko,
Oleg Murk, Oliver Jaffe, Olivia Watkins, Olivier Godement, Owen Campbell-Moore, Patrick
Chao, Paul McMillan, Pavel Belov, Peng Su, Peter Bak, Peter Bakkum, Peter Deng, Peter Dolan,
Peter Hoeschele, Peter Welinder, Phil Tillet, Philip Pronin, Philippe Tillet, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Qiming Yuan, Rachel Dias, Rachel Lim, Rahul Arora, Rajan Troll, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo
Lopes, Raul Puri, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renaud Gaubert, Reza Zamani, Ricky Wang, Rob
Donnelly, Rob Honsby, Rocky Smith, Rohan Sahai, Rohit Ramchandani, Romain Huet, Rory
Carmichael, Rowan Zellers, Roy Chen, Ruby Chen, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Ryan Cheu, Saachi
Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Schoenholz, Sam Toizer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sara
Culver, Scott Ethersmith, Scott Gray, Sean Grove, Sean Metzger, Shamez Hermani, Shantanu
Jain, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shino Jomoto, Shirong Wu, Shuaiqi, Xia, Sonia Phene, Spencer
Papay, Srinivas Narayanan, Steve Coffey, Steve Lee, Stewart Hall, Suchir Balaji, Tal Broda, Tal
Stramer, Tao Xu, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas
Cunninghman, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Thomas Raoux, Thomas Shadwell, Tianhao
Zheng, Todd Underwood, Todor Markov, Toki Sherbakov, Tom Rubin, Tom Stasi, Tomer Kaftan,
Tristan Heywood, Troy Peterson, Tyce Walters, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Veit Moeller, Vinnie
Monaco, Vishal Kuo, Vlad Fomenko, Wayne Chang, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wesam Manassra,
Will Sheu, Wojciech Zaremba, Yash Patil, Yilei Qian, Yongjik Kim, Youlong Cheng, Yu Zhang,
Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yujia Jin, Yunxing Dai, and Yury Malkov. Gpt-4o system card, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Davide Paglieri, Bartłomiej Cupiał, Samuel Coward, Ulyana Piterbarg, Maciej Wolczyk, Akbir Khan,
Eduardo Pignatelli, Łukasz Kuci´nski, Lerrel Pinto, Rob Fergus, et al. Balrog: Benchmarking
agentic llm and vlm reasoning on games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13543, 2024.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
self-supervised prediction. In ICML, 2017.
Paul R Pintrich and Akene Zusho. The development of academic self-regulation: The role of cognitive
and motivational factors. In Development of achievement motivation, pp. 249–284. Elsevier, 2002.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro, Fabio
Petroni, Heinrich Küttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Minihack the planet: A
sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2109.13202.
Omar Shaikh, Michelle S Lam, Joey Hejna, Yijia Shao, Hyundong Justin Cho, Michael S Bernstein,
and Diyi Yang. Aligning language models with demonstrated feedback. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Yijia Shao, Vinay Samuel, Yucheng Jiang, John Yang, and Diyi Yang. Collaborative gym: A frame-
work for enabling and evaluating human-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15701,
2024.
Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Zheyuan Hu, Tony Z. Zhao, Archit Sharma, Karl Pertsch, Jianlan Luo, Sergey
Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Yell at your robot: Improving on-the-fly from language corrections.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2403.12910, 2024.
Mirac Suzgun and Adam Tauman Kalai. Meta-prompting: Enhancing language models with task-
agnostic scaffolding. arXiv, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.12954. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2401.12954.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Melvin Johnson,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Timothy
Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul R. Barham, Tom
Hennigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan Doherty, Eli
Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha Goel, Jack
Krawczyk, Cosmo Du, Ed Chi, Heng-Tze Cheng, Eric Ni, Purvi Shah, Patrick Kane, Betty Chan,
Manaal Faruqui, Aliaksei Severyn, Hanzhao Lin, YaGuang Li, Yong Cheng, Abe Ittycheriah,
Mahdis Mahdieh, Mia Chen, Pei Sun, Dustin Tran, Sumit Bagri, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
Jeremiah Liu, Andras Orban, Fabian Güra, Hao Zhou, Xinying Song, Aurelien Boffy, Harish
Ganapathy, Steven Zheng, HyunJeong Choe, Ágoston Weisz, Tao Zhu, Yifeng Lu, Siddharth
Gopal, Jarrod Kahn, Maciej Kula, Jeff Pitman, Rushin Shah, Emanuel Taropa, Majd Al Merey,
Martin Baeuml, Zhifeng Chen, Laurent El Shafey, Yujing Zhang, Olcan Sercinoglu, George Tucker,
Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Danihelka, Becca Roelofs,
Anaïs White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati, Mehran Kazemi, Lucas
Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Frechette, Charlotte Smith, Laura Culp,
Lev Proleev, Yi Luan, Xi Chen, James Lottes, Nathan Schucher, Federico Lebron, Alban Rrustemi,
Natalie Clay, Phil Crone, Tomas Kocisky, Jeffrey Zhao, Bartek Perz, Dian Yu, Heidi Howard, Adam
Bloniarz, Jack W. Rae, Han Lu, Laurent Sifre, Marcello Maggioni, Fred Alcober, Dan Garrette,
Megan Barnes, Shantanu Thakoor, Jacob Austin, Gabriel Barth-Maron, William Wong, Rishabh
Joshi, Rahma Chaabouni, Deeni Fatiha, Arun Ahuja, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Evan Senter, Martin
Chadwick, Ilya Kornakov, Nithya Attaluri, Iñaki Iturrate, Ruibo Liu, Yunxuan Li, Sarah Cogan,
Jeremy Chen, Chao Jia, Chenjie Gu, Qiao Zhang, Jordan Grimstad, Ale Jakse Hartman, Xavier
Garcia, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Jacob Devlin, Michael Laskin, Diego de Las Casas,
Dasha Valter, Connie Tao, Lorenzo Blanco, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, David Reitter, Mianna
Chen, Jenny Brennan, Clara Rivera, Sergey Brin, Shariq Iqbal, Gabriela Surita, Jane Labanowski,
Abhi Rao, Stephanie Winkler, Emilio Parisotto, Yiming Gu, Kate Olszewska, Ravi Addanki,
Antoine Miech, Annie Louis, Denis Teplyashin, Geoff Brown, Elliot Catt, Jan Balaguer, Jackie
Xiang, Pidong Wang, Zoe Ashwood, Anton Briukhov, Albert Webson, Sanjay Ganapathy, Smit
Sanghavi, Ajay Kannan, Ming-Wei Chang, Axel Stjerngren, Josip Djolonga, Yuting Sun, Ankur
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Bapna, Matthew Aitchison, Pedram Pejman, Henryk Michalewski, Tianhe Yu, Cindy Wang, Juliette
Love, Junwhan Ahn, Dawn Bloxwich, Kehang Han, Peter Humphreys, Thibault Sellam, James
Bradbury, Varun Godbole, Sina Samangooei, Bogdan Damoc, Alex Kaskasoli, Sébastien M. R.
Arnold, Vijay Vasudevan, Shubham Agrawal, Jason Riesa, Dmitry Lepikhin, Richard Tanburn,
Srivatsan Srinivasan, Hyeontaek Lim, Sarah Hodkinson, Pranav Shyam, Johan Ferret, Steven Hand,
Ankush Garg, Tom Le Paine, Jian Li, Yujia Li, Minh Giang, Alexander Neitz, Zaheer Abbas, Sarah
York, Machel Reid, Elizabeth Cole, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Dipanjan Das, Dominika Rogozi´nska,
Vitaliy Nikolaev, Pablo Sprechmann, Zachary Nado, Lukas Zilka, Flavien Prost, Luheng He,
Marianne Monteiro, Gaurav Mishra, Chris Welty, Josh Newlan, Dawei Jia, Miltiadis Allamanis,
Clara Huiyi Hu, Raoul de Liedekerke, Justin Gilmer, Carl Saroufim, Shruti Rijhwani, Shaobo Hou,
Disha Shrivastava, Anirudh Baddepudi, Alex Goldin, Adnan Ozturel, Albin Cassirer, Yunhan Xu,
Daniel Sohn, Devendra Sachan, Reinald Kim Amplayo, Craig Swanson, Dessie Petrova, Shashi
Narayan, Arthur Guez, Siddhartha Brahma, Jessica Landon, Miteyan Patel, Ruizhe Zhao, Kevin
Villela, Luyu Wang, Wenhao Jia, Matthew Rahtz, Mai Giménez, Legg Yeung, James Keeling,
Petko Georgiev, Diana Mincu, Boxi Wu, Salem Haykal, Rachel Saputro, Kiran Vodrahalli, James
Qin, Zeynep Cankara, Abhanshu Sharma, Nick Fernando, Will Hawkins, Behnam Neyshabur,
Solomon Kim, Adrian Hutter, Priyanka Agrawal, Alex Castro-Ros, George van den Driessche,
Tao Wang, Fan Yang, Shuo yiin Chang, Paul Komarek, Ross McIlroy, Mario Luˇci´c, Guodong
Zhang, Wael Farhan, Michael Sharman, Paul Natsev, Paul Michel, Yamini Bansal, Siyuan Qiao,
Kris Cao, Siamak Shakeri, Christina Butterfield, Justin Chung, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Shivani
Agrawal, Arthur Mensch, Kedar Soparkar, Karel Lenc, Timothy Chung, Aedan Pope, Loren
Maggiore, Jackie Kay, Priya Jhakra, Shibo Wang, Joshua Maynez, Mary Phuong, Taylor Tobin,
Andrea Tacchetti, Maja Trebacz, Kevin Robinson, Yash Katariya, Sebastian Riedel, Paige Bailey,
Kefan Xiao, Nimesh Ghelani, Lora Aroyo, Ambrose Slone, Neil Houlsby, Xuehan Xiong, Zhen
Yang, Elena Gribovskaya, Jonas Adler, Mateo Wirth, Lisa Lee, Music Li, Thais Kagohara, Jay
Pavagadhi, Sophie Bridgers, Anna Bortsova, Sanjay Ghemawat, Zafarali Ahmed, Tianqi Liu,
Richard Powell, Vijay Bolina, Mariko Iinuma, Polina Zablotskaia, James Besley, Da-Woon Chung,
Timothy Dozat, Ramona Comanescu, Xiance Si, Jeremy Greer, Guolong Su, Martin Polacek,
Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Simon Tokumine, Hexiang Hu, Elena Buchatskaya, Yingjie Miao,
Mohamed Elhawaty, Aditya Siddhant, Nenad Tomasev, Jinwei Xing, Christina Greer, Helen Miller,
Shereen Ashraf, Aurko Roy, Zizhao Zhang, Ada Ma, Angelos Filos, Milos Besta, Rory Blevins,
Ted Klimenko, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Soravit Changpinyo, Jiaqi Mu, Oscar Chang, Mantas Pajarskas,
Carrie Muir, Vered Cohen, Charline Le Lan, Krishna Haridasan, Amit Marathe, Steven Hansen,
Sholto Douglas, Rajkumar Samuel, Mingqiu Wang, Sophia Austin, Chang Lan, Jiepu Jiang, Justin
Chiu, Jaime Alonso Lorenzo, Lars Lowe Sjösund, Sébastien Cevey, Zach Gleicher, Thi Avrahami,
Anudhyan Boral, Hansa Srinivasan, Vittorio Selo, Rhys May, Konstantinos Aisopos, Léonard
Hussenot, Livio Baldini Soares, Kate Baumli, Michael B. Chang, Adrià Recasens, Ben Caine,
Alexander Pritzel, Filip Pavetic, Fabio Pardo, Anita Gergely, Justin Frye, Vinay Ramasesh, Dan
Horgan, Kartikeya Badola, Nora Kassner, Subhrajit Roy, Ethan Dyer, Víctor Campos Campos, Alex
Tomala, Yunhao Tang, Dalia El Badawy, Elspeth White, Basil Mustafa, Oran Lang, Abhishek Jindal,
Sharad Vikram, Zhitao Gong, Sergi Caelles, Ross Hemsley, Gregory Thornton, Fangxiaoyu Feng,
Wojciech Stokowiec, Ce Zheng, Phoebe Thacker, Ça˘glar Ünlü, Zhishuai Zhang, Mohammad Saleh,
James Svensson, Max Bileschi, Piyush Patil, Ankesh Anand, Roman Ring, Katerina Tsihlas, Arpi
Vezer, Marco Selvi, Toby Shevlane, Mikel Rodriguez, Tom Kwiatkowski, Samira Daruki, Keran
Rong, Allan Dafoe, Nicholas FitzGerald, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Mina Khan, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
Marie Pellat, Vladimir Feinberg, James Cobon-Kerr, Tara Sainath, Maribeth Rauh, Sayed Hadi
Hashemi, Richard Ives, Yana Hasson, Eric Noland, Yuan Cao, Nathan Byrd, Le Hou, Qingze
Wang, Thibault Sottiaux, Michela Paganini, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alexandre Moufarek, Samer
Hassan, Kaushik Shivakumar, Joost van Amersfoort, Amol Mandhane, Pratik Joshi, Anirudh
Goyal, Matthew Tung, Andrew Brock, Hannah Sheahan, Vedant Misra, Cheng Li, Nemanja
Raki´cevi´c, Mostafa Dehghani, Fangyu Liu, Sid Mittal, Junhyuk Oh, Seb Noury, Eren Sezener,
Fantine Huot, Matthew Lamm, Nicola De Cao, Charlie Chen, Sidharth Mudgal, Romina Stella,
Kevin Brooks, Gautam Vasudevan, Chenxi Liu, Mainak Chain, Nivedita Melinkeri, Aaron Cohen,
Venus Wang, Kristie Seymore, Sergey Zubkov, Rahul Goel, Summer Yue, Sai Krishnakumaran,
Brian Albert, Nate Hurley, Motoki Sano, Anhad Mohananey, Jonah Joughin, Egor Filonov, Tomasz
K˛epa, Yomna Eldawy, Jiawern Lim, Rahul Rishi, Shirin Badiezadegan, Taylor Bos, Jerry Chang,
Sanil Jain, Sri Gayatri Sundara Padmanabhan, Subha Puttagunta, Kalpesh Krishna, Leslie Baker,
Norbert Kalb, Vamsi Bedapudi, Adam Kurzrok, Shuntong Lei, Anthony Yu, Oren Litvin, Xiang
Zhou, Zhichun Wu, Sam Sobell, Andrea Siciliano, Alan Papir, Robby Neale, Jonas Bragagnolo,
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Tej Toor, Tina Chen, Valentin Anklin, Feiran Wang, Richie Feng, Milad Gholami, Kevin Ling,
Lijuan Liu, Jules Walter, Hamid Moghaddam, Arun Kishore, Jakub Adamek, Tyler Mercado,
Jonathan Mallinson, Siddhinita Wandekar, Stephen Cagle, Eran Ofek, Guillermo Garrido, Clemens
Lombriser, Maksim Mukha, Botu Sun, Hafeezul Rahman Mohammad, Josip Matak, Yadi Qian,
Vikas Peswani, Pawel Janus, Quan Yuan, Leif Schelin, Oana David, Ankur Garg, Yifan He,
Oleksii Duzhyi, Anton Älgmyr, Timothée Lottaz, Qi Li, Vikas Yadav, Luyao Xu, Alex Chinien,
Rakesh Shivanna, Aleksandr Chuklin, Josie Li, Carrie Spadine, Travis Wolfe, Kareem Mohamed,
Subhabrata Das, Zihang Dai, Kyle He, Daniel von Dincklage, Shyam Upadhyay, Akanksha Maurya,
Luyan Chi, Sebastian Krause, Khalid Salama, Pam G Rabinovitch, Pavan Kumar Reddy M, Aarush
Selvan, Mikhail Dektiarev, Golnaz Ghiasi, Erdem Guven, Himanshu Gupta, Boyi Liu, Deepak
Sharma, Idan Heimlich Shtacher, Shachi Paul, Oscar Akerlund, François-Xavier Aubet, Terry
Huang, Chen Zhu, Eric Zhu, Elico Teixeira, Matthew Fritze, Francesco Bertolini, Liana-Eleonora
Marinescu, Martin Bölle, Dominik Paulus, Khyatti Gupta, Tejasi Latkar, Max Chang, Jason
Sanders, Roopa Wilson, Xuewei Wu, Yi-Xuan Tan, Lam Nguyen Thiet, Tulsee Doshi, Sid Lall,
Swaroop Mishra, Wanming Chen, Thang Luong, Seth Benjamin, Jasmine Lee, Ewa Andrejczuk,
Dominik Rabiej, Vipul Ranjan, Krzysztof Styrc, Pengcheng Yin, Jon Simon, Malcolm Rose
Harriott, Mudit Bansal, Alexei Robsky, Geoff Bacon, David Greene, Daniil Mirylenka, Chen
Zhou, Obaid Sarvana, Abhimanyu Goyal, Samuel Andermatt, Patrick Siegler, Ben Horn, Assaf
Israel, Francesco Pongetti, Chih-Wei "Louis" Chen, Marco Selvatici, Pedro Silva, Kathie Wang,
Jackson Tolins, Kelvin Guu, Roey Yogev, Xiaochen Cai, Alessandro Agostini, Maulik Shah,
Hung Nguyen, Noah Ó Donnaile, Sébastien Pereira, Linda Friso, Adam Stambler, Adam Kurzrok,
Chenkai Kuang, Yan Romanikhin, Mark Geller, ZJ Yan, Kane Jang, Cheng-Chun Lee, Wojciech
Fica, Eric Malmi, Qijun Tan, Dan Banica, Daniel Balle, Ryan Pham, Yanping Huang, Diana
Avram, Hongzhi Shi, Jasjot Singh, Chris Hidey, Niharika Ahuja, Pranab Saxena, Dan Dooley,
Srividya Pranavi Potharaju, Eileen O’Neill, Anand Gokulchandran, Ryan Foley, Kai Zhao, Mike
Dusenberry, Yuan Liu, Pulkit Mehta, Ragha Kotikalapudi, Chalence Safranek-Shrader, Andrew
Goodman, Joshua Kessinger, Eran Globen, Prateek Kolhar, Chris Gorgolewski, Ali Ibrahim,
Yang Song, Ali Eichenbaum, Thomas Brovelli, Sahitya Potluri, Preethi Lahoti, Cip Baetu, Ali
Ghorbani, Charles Chen, Andy Crawford, Shalini Pal, Mukund Sridhar, Petru Gurita, Asier
Mujika, Igor Petrovski, Pierre-Louis Cedoz, Chenmei Li, Shiyuan Chen, Niccolò Dal Santo,
Siddharth Goyal, Jitesh Punjabi, Karthik Kappaganthu, Chester Kwak, Pallavi LV, Sarmishta
Velury, Himadri Choudhury, Jamie Hall, Premal Shah, Ricardo Figueira, Matt Thomas, Minjie
Lu, Ting Zhou, Chintu Kumar, Thomas Jurdi, Sharat Chikkerur, Yenai Ma, Adams Yu, Soo
Kwak, Victor Ähdel, Sujeevan Rajayogam, Travis Choma, Fei Liu, Aditya Barua, Colin Ji, Ji Ho
Park, Vincent Hellendoorn, Alex Bailey, Taylan Bilal, Huanjie Zhou, Mehrdad Khatir, Charles
Sutton, Wojciech Rzadkowski, Fiona Macintosh, Roopali Vij, Konstantin Shagin, Paul Medina,
Chen Liang, Jinjing Zhou, Pararth Shah, Yingying Bi, Attila Dankovics, Shipra Banga, Sabine
Lehmann, Marissa Bredesen, Zifan Lin, John Eric Hoffmann, Jonathan Lai, Raynald Chung, Kai
Yang, Nihal Balani, Arthur Bražinskas, Andrei Sozanschi, Matthew Hayes, Héctor Fernández
Alcalde, Peter Makarov, Will Chen, Antonio Stella, Liselotte Snijders, Michael Mandl, Ante
Kärrman, Paweł Nowak, Xinyi Wu, Alex Dyck, Krishnan Vaidyanathan, Raghavender R, Jessica
Mallet, Mitch Rudominer, Eric Johnston, Sushil Mittal, Akhil Udathu, Janara Christensen, Vishal
Verma, Zach Irving, Andreas Santucci, Gamaleldin Elsayed, Elnaz Davoodi, Marin Georgiev, Ian
Tenney, Nan Hua, Geoffrey Cideron, Edouard Leurent, Mahmoud Alnahlawi, Ionut Georgescu,
Nan Wei, Ivy Zheng, Dylan Scandinaro, Heinrich Jiang, Jasper Snoek, Mukund Sundararajan,
Xuezhi Wang, Zack Ontiveros, Itay Karo, Jeremy Cole, Vinu Rajashekhar, Lara Tumeh, Eyal Ben-
David, Rishub Jain, Jonathan Uesato, Romina Datta, Oskar Bunyan, Shimu Wu, John Zhang, Piotr
Stanczyk, Ye Zhang, David Steiner, Subhajit Naskar, Michael Azzam, Matthew Johnson, Adam
Paszke, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Jaume Sanchez Elias, Afroz Mohiuddin, Faizan Muhammad, Jin
Miao, Andrew Lee, Nino Vieillard, Jane Park, Jiageng Zhang, Jeff Stanway, Drew Garmon, Abhijit
Karmarkar, Zhe Dong, Jong Lee, Aviral Kumar, Luowei Zhou, Jonathan Evens, William Isaac,
Geoffrey Irving, Edward Loper, Michael Fink, Isha Arkatkar, Nanxin Chen, Izhak Shafran, Ivan
Petrychenko, Zhe Chen, Johnson Jia, Anselm Levskaya, Zhenkai Zhu, Peter Grabowski, Yu Mao,
Alberto Magni, Kaisheng Yao, Javier Snaider, Norman Casagrande, Evan Palmer, Paul Suganthan,
Alfonso Castaño, Irene Giannoumis, Wooyeol Kim, Mikołaj Rybi´nski, Ashwin Sreevatsa, Jennifer
Prendki, David Soergel, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Willi Gierke, Mohsen Jafari, Meenu Gaba, Jeremy
Wiesner, Diana Gage Wright, Yawen Wei, Harsha Vashisht, Yana Kulizhskaya, Jay Hoover, Maigo
Le, Lu Li, Chimezie Iwuanyanwu, Lu Liu, Kevin Ramirez, Andrey Khorlin, Albert Cui, Tian
LIN, Marcus Wu, Ricardo Aguilar, Keith Pallo, Abhishek Chakladar, Ginger Perng, Elena Allica
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Abellan, Mingyang Zhang, Ishita Dasgupta, Nate Kushman, Ivo Penchev, Alena Repina, Xihui Wu,
Tom van der Weide, Priya Ponnapalli, Caroline Kaplan, Jiri Simsa, Shuangfeng Li, Olivier Dousse,
Fan Yang, Jeff Piper, Nathan Ie, Rama Pasumarthi, Nathan Lintz, Anitha Vijayakumar, Daniel
Andor, Pedro Valenzuela, Minnie Lui, Cosmin Paduraru, Daiyi Peng, Katherine Lee, Shuyuan
Zhang, Somer Greene, Duc Dung Nguyen, Paula Kurylowicz, Cassidy Hardin, Lucas Dixon, Lili
Janzer, Kiam Choo, Ziqiang Feng, Biao Zhang, Achintya Singhal, Dayou Du, Dan McKinnon,
Natasha Antropova, Tolga Bolukbasi, Orgad Keller, David Reid, Daniel Finchelstein, Maria Abi
Raad, Remi Crocker, Peter Hawkins, Robert Dadashi, Colin Gaffney, Ken Franko, Anna Bulanova,
Rémi Leblond, Shirley Chung, Harry Askham, Luis C. Cobo, Kelvin Xu, Felix Fischer, Jun Xu,
Christina Sorokin, Chris Alberti, Chu-Cheng Lin, Colin Evans, Alek Dimitriev, Hannah Forbes,
Dylan Banarse, Zora Tung, Mark Omernick, Colton Bishop, Rachel Sterneck, Rohan Jain, Jiawei
Xia, Ehsan Amid, Francesco Piccinno, Xingyu Wang, Praseem Banzal, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Alex
Polozov, Victoria Krakovna, Sasha Brown, MohammadHossein Bateni, Dennis Duan, Vlad Firoiu,
Meghana Thotakuri, Tom Natan, Matthieu Geist, Ser tan Girgin, Hui Li, Jiayu Ye, Ofir Roval,
Reiko Tojo, Michael Kwong, James Lee-Thorp, Christopher Yew, Danila Sinopalnikov, Sabela
Ramos, John Mellor, Abhishek Sharma, Kathy Wu, David Miller, Nicolas Sonnerat, Denis Vnukov,
Rory Greig, Jennifer Beattie, Emily Caveness, Libin Bai, Julian Eisenschlos, Alex Korchemniy,
Tomy Tsai, Mimi Jasarevic, Weize Kong, Phuong Dao, Zeyu Zheng, Frederick Liu, Fan Yang,
Rui Zhu, Tian Huey Teh, Jason Sanmiya, Evgeny Gladchenko, Nejc Trdin, Daniel Toyama, Evan
Rosen, Sasan Tavakkol, Linting Xue, Chen Elkind, Oliver Woodman, John Carpenter, George
Papamakarios, Rupert Kemp, Sushant Kafle, Tanya Grunina, Rishika Sinha, Alice Talbert, Diane
Wu, Denese Owusu-Afriyie, Cosmo Du, Chloe Thornton, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Pradyumna Narayana,
Jing Li, Saaber Fatehi, John Wieting, Omar Ajmeri, Benigno Uria, Yeongil Ko, Laura Knight,
Amélie Héliou, Ning Niu, Shane Gu, Chenxi Pang, Yeqing Li, Nir Levine, Ariel Stolovich, Rebeca
Santamaria-Fernandez, Sonam Goenka, Wenny Yustalim, Robin Strudel, Ali Elqursh, Charlie
Deck, Hyo Lee, Zonglin Li, Kyle Levin, Raphael Hoffmann, Dan Holtmann-Rice, Olivier Bachem,
Sho Arora, Christy Koh, Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, Siim Põder, Mukarram Tariq, Yanhua Sun,
Lucian Ionita, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Pouya Tafti, Zhiyu Liu, Anmol Gulati, Jasmine Liu, Xinyu
Ye, Bart Chrzaszcz, Lily Wang, Nikhil Sethi, Tianrun Li, Ben Brown, Shreya Singh, Wei Fan,
Aaron Parisi, Joe Stanton, Vinod Koverkathu, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Yunjie Li, TJ Lu,
Abe Ittycheriah, Prakash Shroff, Mani Varadarajan, Sanaz Bahargam, Rob Willoughby, David
Gaddy, Guillaume Desjardins, Marco Cornero, Brona Robenek, Bhavishya Mittal, Ben Albrecht,
Ashish Shenoy, Fedor Moiseev, Henrik Jacobsson, Alireza Ghaffarkhah, Morgane Rivière, Alanna
Walton, Clément Crepy, Alicia Parrish, Zongwei Zhou, Clement Farabet, Carey Radebaugh,
Praveen Srinivasan, Claudia van der Salm, Andreas Fidjeland, Salvatore Scellato, Eri Latorre-
Chimoto, Hanna Klimczak-Pluci´nska, David Bridson, Dario de Cesare, Tom Hudson, Piermaria
Mendolicchio, Lexi Walker, Alex Morris, Matthew Mauger, Alexey Guseynov, Alison Reid, Seth
Odoom, Lucia Loher, Victor Cotruta, Madhavi Yenugula, Dominik Grewe, Anastasia Petrushkina,
Tom Duerig, Antonio Sanchez, Steve Yadlowsky, Amy Shen, Amir Globerson, Lynette Webb,
Sahil Dua, Dong Li, Surya Bhupatiraju, Dan Hurt, Haroon Qureshi, Ananth Agarwal, Tomer
Shani, Matan Eyal, Anuj Khare, Shreyas Rammohan Belle, Lei Wang, Chetan Tekur, Mihir Sanjay
Kale, Jinliang Wei, Ruoxin Sang, Brennan Saeta, Tyler Liechty, Yi Sun, Yao Zhao, Stephan
Lee, Pandu Nayak, Doug Fritz, Manish Reddy Vuyyuru, John Aslanides, Nidhi Vyas, Martin
Wicke, Xiao Ma, Evgenii Eltyshev, Nina Martin, Hardie Cate, James Manyika, Keyvan Amiri,
Yelin Kim, Xi Xiong, Kai Kang, Florian Luisier, Nilesh Tripuraneni, David Madras, Mandy Guo,
Austin Waters, Oliver Wang, Joshua Ainslie, Jason Baldridge, Han Zhang, Garima Pruthi, Jakob
Bauer, Feng Yang, Riham Mansour, Jason Gelman, Yang Xu, George Polovets, Ji Liu, Honglong
Cai, Warren Chen, XiangHai Sheng, Emily Xue, Sherjil Ozair, Christof Angermueller, Xiaowei
Li, Anoop Sinha, Weiren Wang, Julia Wiesinger, Emmanouil Koukoumidis, Yuan Tian, Anand
Iyer, Madhu Gurumurthy, Mark Goldenson, Parashar Shah, MK Blake, Hongkun Yu, Anthony
Urbanowicz, Jennimaria Palomaki, Chrisantha Fernando, Ken Durden, Harsh Mehta, Nikola
Momchev, Elahe Rahimtoroghi, Maria Georgaki, Amit Raul, Sebastian Ruder, Morgan Redshaw,
Jinhyuk Lee, Denny Zhou, Komal Jalan, Dinghua Li, Blake Hechtman, Parker Schuh, Milad Nasr,
Kieran Milan, Vladimir Mikulik, Juliana Franco, Tim Green, Nam Nguyen, Joe Kelley, Aroma
Mahendru, Andrea Hu, Joshua Howland, Ben Vargas, Jeffrey Hui, Kshitij Bansal, Vikram Rao,
Rakesh Ghiya, Emma Wang, Ke Ye, Jean Michel Sarr, Melanie Moranski Preston, Madeleine
Elish, Steve Li, Aakash Kaku, Jigar Gupta, Ice Pasupat, Da-Cheng Juan, Milan Someswar, Tejvi
M., Xinyun Chen, Aida Amini, Alex Fabrikant, Eric Chu, Xuanyi Dong, Amruta Muthal, Senaka
Buthpitiya, Sarthak Jauhari, Nan Hua, Urvashi Khandelwal, Ayal Hitron, Jie Ren, Larissa Rinaldi,
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Shahar Drath, Avigail Dabush, Nan-Jiang Jiang, Harshal Godhia, Uli Sachs, Anthony Chen,
Yicheng Fan, Hagai Taitelbaum, Hila Noga, Zhuyun Dai, James Wang, Chen Liang, Jenny Hamer,
Chun-Sung Ferng, Chenel Elkind, Aviel Atias, Paulina Lee, Vít Listík, Mathias Carlen, Jan van de
Kerkhof, Marcin Pikus, Krunoslav Zaher, Paul Müller, Sasha Zykova, Richard Stefanec, Vitaly
Gatsko, Christoph Hirnschall, Ashwin Sethi, Xingyu Federico Xu, Chetan Ahuja, Beth Tsai,
Anca Stefanoiu, Bo Feng, Keshav Dhandhania, Manish Katyal, Akshay Gupta, Atharva Parulekar,
Divya Pitta, Jing Zhao, Vivaan Bhatia, Yashodha Bhavnani, Omar Alhadlaq, Xiaolin Li, Peter
Danenberg, Dennis Tu, Alex Pine, Vera Filippova, Abhipso Ghosh, Ben Limonchik, Bhargava
Urala, Chaitanya Krishna Lanka, Derik Clive, Yi Sun, Edward Li, Hao Wu, Kevin Hongtongsak,
Ianna Li, Kalind Thakkar, Kuanysh Omarov, Kushal Majmundar, Michael Alverson, Michael
Kucharski, Mohak Patel, Mudit Jain, Maksim Zabelin, Paolo Pelagatti, Rohan Kohli, Saurabh
Kumar, Joseph Kim, Swetha Sankar, Vineet Shah, Lakshmi Ramachandruni, Xiangkai Zeng, Ben
Bariach, Laura Weidinger, Tu Vu, Alek Andreev, Antoine He, Kevin Hui, Sheleem Kashem, Amar
Subramanya, Sissie Hsiao, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Adam Sadovsky, Quoc Le,
Trevor Strohman, Yonghui Wu, Slav Petrov, Jeffrey Dean, and Oriol Vinyals. Gemini: A family of
highly capable multimodal models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805.
Michael Tomasello, Ann Cale Kruger, and Hilary Horn Ratner. Cultural learning. Behavioral and
brain sciences, 16(3):495–511, 1993.
Vijay Viswanathan, Kiril Gashteovski, Kiril Gashteovski, Carolin Lawrence, Tongshuang Wu, and
Graham Neubig. Large language models enable few-shot clustering. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 12:321–333, 2024.
Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang, and
Tao Yu. Text2reward: Reward shaping with language models for reinforcement learning. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ-bench: A benchmark for
tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045, 2024.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Xuhui Zhou, Hao Zhu, Leena Mathur, Ruohong Zhang, Haofei Yu, Zhengyang Qi, Louis-Philippe
Morency, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. Sotopia: Interactive evaluation
for social intelligence in language agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024b.
Yifei Zhou, Qianlan Yang, Kaixiang Lin, Min Bai, Xiong Zhou, Yu-Xiong Wang, Sergey Levine,
and Erran Li. Proposer-agent-evaluator(pae): Autonomous skill discovery for foundation model
internet agents, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13194.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
CONTENT OF APPENDIX
1. AutoLibra Ladder Methodology
– A Illustration of AutoLibra Method
– B Algorithm of AutoLibra Ladder
– C AutoLibra Ladder Experiment Configuration
2. Baba-is-ai
– D Rules and Environment Details
– E Experiment Results
– F Metric Scores
– G Metric Examples
– H Prompts
– I Qualitative Observations of Agent Performance
3. MiniHack
– J Rules and Environment Details
– K Experiment Results
– L Metric Scores
– M Metric Examples
– N Prompts
– O Qualitative Observations of Agent Performance
4. WebVoyager
– P NNetNav-Live Induced Metrics
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
ILLUSTRATION OF AUTOLIBRA METHOD
INDUCTION
STEP 1
Feedback Grounding
Converting a pair of agent trajectory and 
human feedback into a set of aspects. An 
aspect is a triple of agent behavior, feedback 
aspect, and whether the aspect is postive.
Agent 
Trajectory
Human 
Feedback
Aspects
some behavior in 
the trajectory
corresponding 
feedback aspect
LLM
Figure 6: Feedback Grounding
Behavior Clustering
Aggregate the aspects from M (trajectory, 
feedback) pairs, and cluster them into N 
behavior clusters with common concepts. 
These concepts are the induced metrics. 
AutoLibra 
Metrics
xN
Aspects from M 
trajectories
Metric 
Description
Good 
Behaviors
Bad 
Behaviors
INDUCTION
STEP 2
LLM
Figure 7: Behavior Clustering
EVALUATION
STEP 1
Evaluate Agents
The extacted metrics can be used for 
prompting LLMs to produce ratings (+/-/NA) 
for each metric. Positive metrics -> positive 
traits, negative metrics -> negative traits.
Metric 
Description
Good 
Behaviors
Bad 
Behaviors xN
xN
Traits
Evaluate each trajectory 
with induced metrics
LLM
Figure 8: Evaluation with induced metrics
B
ALGORITHM OF AUTOLIBRA LADDER EXPERIMENT
C
AUTOLIBRA LADDER EXPERIMENT SETUP
This section describes the test configuration used during AutoLibra Ladder experiments, as described
in 5.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
xM
EVALUATION
STEP 2
Meta Evaluation
Evaluate how much the detected traits from 
LLM-as-a-Judge could cover the human 
feedback aspects. A high coverage indicates 
the completeness of the induced metrics.
Traits
Aspects
Match
Coverage
Redundancy
Coverage is the overall ratio of aspects matched with traits; 
redundancy is the ratio of traits not matched any aspects.
LLM
aggregation
Figure 9: Meta evaluation
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for iterative agent improvement with AutoLibra
1: for i in range(n_iters) do
2:
for task in selected_tasks do
3:
traji, eval_scorei+ = agent.play(task, prompt)
4:
annotationsi+ = editor.annotate(traji)
5:
end for
6:
metricsi = AutoLibra.extract_metrics(traji, annotationsi)
7:
traj_scoresi = AutoLibra.llm_eval(metricsi, traji)
8:
curr_scores = eval_scorei
9:
while curr_scores <= eval_scorei do
10:
prompt = updated_promptk
11:
for task in selected_tasks do
12:
_, curr_scores = agent.play(task, prompt)
13:
end for
14:
end while
15: end for
For each environment experiment, one unmodified agent is used as a baseline for comparison
(Iteration 0), and three complete iterations of iterative agent improvement with AutoLibra are
performed (Iterations 1-3), for a total of four iterations. Six representative tasks for baba-is-ai are
used in to induce metrics within the AutoLibra pipeline, with the remaining 34 tasks held out for
evaluation. The AutoLibra Ladder pipeline is evaluated on the baba-is-ai and MiniHack environments;
any changes to the agent code, the environment score, trajectory performance, and other metrics are
recorded at the end of each iteration. GPT-4o-241120 OpenAI et al. (2024) is used as the agent model
in all experiments; the human-in-the-loop configuration of the AutoLibra pipeline is used.
D
BABA-IS-AI RULES AND ENVIRONMENT CONFIGURATION
This section discusses the rules and implementation details of Baba is AI, the task environment used
in experiments in Section 4. Baba is AI is derived from Baba is You, a grid-based puzzle video game,
and was originally implemented as part of the BALROG Paglieri et al. (2024) agent benchmark.
Baba Is You is a puzzle game where the player controls a character that can navigate and modify the
rules of the game by pushing blocks containing words such as ’you’, ’is’ ’key’, that, when combined,
define the game’s rules.
The game field consists of a rectangular 4-connected grid with a number of objects, rules blocks, and
obstacles present.
Words (represented as rule blocks) can be combined to form sentences that define the properties of
objects, rules, and obstacles in the game, with rules becoming active when a full sequence of rule
blocks are joined in a 3-block line horizontally or vertically.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 10: Example of the baba-is-ai environment. In this task (two_room-break_stop-make_win-
distr_obj-irrelevant_rule), the agent has to break the "wall is stop" rule by pushing either ’wall’, ’is’,
or ’stop’ out of alignment with the other blocks, and must then push the "key" rule block next to "is
win" at (9, 1) to assemble the win rule, then touch the key at (7, 7) to win. Pushing the "door" rule
block would be a mistake, as no door object is present.
Active rules are built in the form [<subject> <verb> <object>], where the subject and object are the
names of objects in the game, and the verb is one of the following: "is", "has", "can", or "not".
The goal of the game is to reach a win condition, by manipulating the rules of the game to create
new win conditions, modify the properties of objects, or change the behavior or identity of the player
character.
The testing implementation we use is the baba-is-ai environment, a simplified version of Baba is
You originally implemented within the BALROG agent benchmark Cloos et al. (2024); Paglieri et al.
(2024). This implementation has several simplifications compared to the original game, including a
smaller grid size, fewer objects, and a limited set of rules. The environment is designed to be easy
to use and understand, while still providing a challenging testbed for evaluating the performance of
reinforcement learning agents on agentic reasoning tasks.
A single baba-is-ai task is defined by an arbitrary rectangular grid where an exit condition must
be reached, with several possible obstacles and rules preventing the player from reaching the exit.
Intermediate goals to achieving the exit condition can be defined by the user, and the environment
will generate a task that requires the agent to learn how to manipulate the rules of the game in order
to reach the exit. These intermediate goals are referred to as "subtasks" within our paper, and include:
• Goto-Win: The agent must reach a specific location on the grid.
• Make-Win: The agent must create a new win condition by manipulating the rules of the
game.
• Break-Stop: The agent must break or bypass a wall or obstacle in order to reach the exit.
• Change-You: The agent must change the identity of the player character in order to reach
the exit, by modifying the "baba is you" rule.
These subtasks can be arbitrarily combined with distractor objects or rules, immovable game field
walls, and each other to generate tasks of varying complexity and length; baba-is-ai implements 40
total unique tasks of gradually increasing difficulty.
The agent is provided observations in a text form, which includes the current state of the game field,
the currently active rules, and relative locations of obstacles to the active player character in terms of
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
shortest Manhattan distance. This is done to make the environment compatible with purely text-based
language models.
The agent is provided the space of possible actions it can take, which consist moving one space in
one of the four cardinal directions (up, down, left, right), but is not given information about whether
a given move will result in movement; it is thus free to move into immovable walls without effect,
to push rule blocks into corners where they cannot be moved, or to make the task unsolvable by
breaking the active "baba is you" rule without taking control of a new object; in this last instance, the
environment automatically resets the task to a randomized beginning state for that task.
The environment is limited to 100 steps per task episode to avoid tasks being solved by random
walks.
E
BABA-IS-AI EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Iteration
0
1
2
3
Baseline
Babaisai Score GPT-4o
30%
40%
43%
55%
33%
Babaisai Score GPT-4o (Only Held-Out)
33%
40%
44%
53%
33%
Babaisai Score Claude 3.5 Sonnet
35%
40%
45%
55%
37%
Babaisai Score Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Only
Held-Out)
38%
42%
47 %
58%
33%
Average Env. Steps
79
63
60
51
-
Table 3: Baba-is-ai Scores and Average Environment Steps
F
BABA-IS-AI METRIC SCORES
Iteration
0
1
2
3
Win Condition Recognition
35.0%
55.0%
87.5%
87.5%
Rule Modification
0.0%
10.0%
37.5%
61.9%
Direct Navigation Efficiency
5.6%
22.5%
27.5%
37.5%
Context-Sensitive Decision Making
2.5%
27.5%
30.0%
37.5%
Win Rule Construction
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
5.3%
Selective Interaction With Relevant
Objects
35.0%
40.0%
45.0%
82.5%
Rule Manipulation and Execution
0.0%
12.5%
31.0%
35.5%
Subtask Coordination
2.5%
25.0%
27.5%
35.0%
Immovable Interaction
64.9%
69.7%
69.7%
87.9%
Coverage
65.0%
83.0%
85.0%
92.0%
Redundancy
58.0%
59.0%
47.0%
59.0%
Table 4: Metric Performance for baba-is-ai AutoLibra Iterations 0–3, Across Full (40) Environment
Tasks
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
G
BABA-IS-AI METRIC EXAMPLES
Iteration 0: Context-Sensitive Decision Making
Explanation:
This metric assesses the agent’s capacity for context-sensitive decision making. It evaluates
whether the agent tailors its actions according to the immediate game conditions—balancing
between direct navigation and rule modification. Positive behaviors in new environments will
demonstrate an ability to determine when obstacles require intervention and when direct movement
is sufficient, thereby optimizing overall efficiency.
Good Behaviors:
• Accurately gauges the game context by recognizing when obstacles are not an is-
sue—such as when the win condition is already accessible—and refrains from un-
necessary rule modifications.
• Selects focused, goal-oriented actions that align with observed win conditions, avoiding
extraneous exploration.
• Adapts its strategy based on spatial layout and current rules, ensuring that its actions are
timely and appropriate for the situation.
Bad Behaviors:
• Engages in excessive exploratory actions that do not contribute to reaching the win
condition.
• Repeatedly takes ineffective actions (for example, persistently moving into walls) before
finally switching strategy, indicating delayed context-sensitive decisions.
• Alters irrelevant rules or diverts attention from the active win condition when the situation
does not demand it.
• Fails to adjust decision-making based on contextual cues, leading to uncoordinated or
delayed progression toward the goal.
Iteration 1: Rule Modification for Obstacle Management
Explanation:
This metric measures the agent’s competence in managing obstacles through rule modifications.
It focuses on the agent’s ability to detect when a game rule (such as a blocking wall or an
unchangeable character assignment) is hindering progress and to successfully alter that rule to
create a viable path to victory. In novel scenarios, agents displaying positive behavior will apply
targeted rule changes that directly open the path toward the win condition.
Good Behaviors:
• Proactively breaks the ’wall is stop’ rule when an obstacle blocks access to the
win condition.
• Effectively modifies rules—such as replacing ’baba is you’ with ’key’—to re-
move or bypass obstacles.
Bad Behaviors:
• Fails to modify critical rule blocks (for instance, not altering ’baba is you’ when
required) that prevent access to the win condition.
• Does not interact with immovable obstacles like the ’wall is stop’ rule, neglecting
available mechanisms to bypass them.
• Neglects to rearrange rule blocks to create or build necessary win conditions (e.g.,
’door is win’), leaving obstacles unaddressed.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Iteration 2: Subtask Coordination and Overall Task Planning
Explanation:
This metric assesses how well the agent coordinates multiple sub-tasks and plans its overall
strategy. It rewards behaviors that demonstrate clear sequencing – from recognizing obstacles
and manipulating rules to directly advancing toward the final objective. Failures in subtask
coordination result in repetitive loops, ineffective transitions between actions, and an inability to
achieve a meaningful win condition.
Good Behaviors:
• Final movement and approach towards ’ball’ after removing the obstacle.
• Direct movement between objectives as opposed to unrelated exploration.
• Throughout the trajectory, the agent repeatedly chooses actions that reduce the distance
to the door: moving left and down as needed.
• The trajectory demonstrates efficient movement towards the goal without unnecessary
actions.
• The trajectory shows direct movement to the door without redundant backtracking or
circular movement.
• Throughout the trajectory, the agent follows a direct and purposeful path towards its
goal.
Bad Behaviors:
• The trajectory shows multiple iterations of upwards movement resulting in no significant
progress.
• In the trajectory, actions such as repeated ’left’ moves where no significant progress
towards the goal is made.
• In over multiple steps, the agent moves unsuccessfully against immovable boundaries
and objects.
• There are periods in the trajectory where the agent exhibits loops or repetitive movements
without advancing its position strategically.
• Ultimately, the agent’s efforts to form victory conditions do not result in a meaningful or
achievable goal given the map’s configuration.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Iteration 3: Interaction with Immovable Obstacles
Explanation:
This metric measures how the agent handles immovable obstacles. Positive behaviors show proper
recognition and effective avoidance of fixed objects, whereas negative behaviors involve futile or
incorrect push attempts that betray a lack of understanding of the environment’s static features.
Good Behaviors:
• Recognizes that immovable walls or blocks should not be pushed and instead plans to
bypass them.
• Avoids colliding with immovable objects by correctly assessing their fixed nature.
• Plans actions that account for static obstacles, ensuring safe navigation around them.
Bad Behaviors:
• Repeatedly tries to push into an immovable wall or rule block despite the known con-
straints.
• Interacts with stationary obstacles in ways that disregard their immovability, leading to
ineffective progress.
• Executes push commands in the wrong direction on fixed objects, indicating a misunder-
standing of obstacle dynamics.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
H
BABA-IS-AI PROMPTS
Iteration 0 Baba-is-ai Prompt
Baba Is You is a puzzle game where you can manipulate the rules of each level. The following are
the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action:
• idle: wait for one step,
• up: take one step up,
• right: take one step to the right,
• down: take one step down,
• left: take one step to the left.
Tips:
• Examine the level carefully, noting all objects and text blocks present.
• Identify the current rules, which are formed by text blocks in the format "[Subject] IS
[Property]" (e.g. "BABA IS YOU").
• Consider how you can change or create new rules by moving text blocks around.
• Remember that you can only move objects or text that are not defined as "STOP" or similar
immovable properties.
• Your goal is usually to reach an object defined as "WIN", but this can be changed.
• Think creatively about how changing rules can alter the properties and behaviors of objects
in unexpected ways.
• If stuck, try breaking apart existing rules or forming completely new ones.
• Sometimes the solution involves making yourself a different object or changing what
counts as the win condition.
PLAY!
Current Observation:
Active rules:
• ball is win
• baba is you
Objects on the map:
• rule ball: 5 steps to the left and 1 step up
• rule is: 4 steps to the left and 1 step up
• rule win: 3 steps to the left and 1 step up
• ball: 5 steps to the left and 2 steps down
• rule baba: 5 steps to the left and 4 steps down
• rule is: 4 steps to the left and 4 steps down
• rule you: 3 steps to the left and 4 steps down
First, think about the best course of action. Then, you must choose exactly one of the listed actions
and output it strictly in the following format:
<|ACTION|>YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION<|END|>
Replace YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION with the chosen action.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Iteration 1 Baba-is-ai Prompt
Baba Is You is a puzzle game where you can manipulate the rules of each level. The following are
the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action:
• idle: wait for one step,
• up: take one step up,
• right: take one step to the right,
• down: take one step down,
• left: take one step to the left.
Additional Tips:
1. The game is won by identifying a win condition and making it true by placing the "object
is win" rule blocks next to each other in line.
2. First, identify the win condition and where the object corresponding to the win condition
is located.
3. If it is blocked, identify the rules that are blocking it and try to remove them, or circumvent
them by changing the character you control by changing the "baba is you" rule.
4. If the path to the win condition is not blocked, travel directly to the win condition object
without distractions.
5. If a "wall is stop" rule is bounded on two sides by walls, the blocks cannot be moved, and
you must find another way to reach the win condition.
6. Ignore any objects not related to the win condition, as they are not necessary to complete
the level.
Example:
If your observation is:
Active rules: ball is win wall is stop baba is you
Objects on the map: wall 5 steps to the right and 2 steps up
rule ball 8 steps to the right and 2 steps up
rule is 9 steps to the right and 2 steps up
rule win 10 steps to the right and 2 steps up
rule wall 1 step up
rule is 1 step to the right and 1 step up
rule stop 2 steps to the right and 1 step up
wall 5 steps to the right and 1 step up
rule door 10 steps to the right and 1 step up
wall 5 steps to the right
ball 6 steps to the right
wall 5 steps to the right and 1 step down
wall 5 steps to the right and 2 steps down
wall 5 steps to the right and 3 steps down
rule baba 4 steps down
rule is 1 step to the right and 4 steps down
rule you 2 steps to the right and 4 steps down
wall 5 steps to the right and 4 steps down
door 7 steps to the right and 4 steps down
You should reason that:
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• The win condition is "ball is win," therefore you should reach the ball to win.
• The ball is blocked by a wall, so you should remove the "wall is stop" rule.
• The "wall is stop" rule is not bounded by walls, so you can move the blocks to remove the
rule.
• The door is not necessary to reach the win condition, so you can ignore it.
• Once the "wall is stop" rule is removed, you can move directly to the ball to win.
PLAY!
Current Observation:
Active rules: baba is you
Objects on the map:
• rule is: 2 steps to the left and 3 steps up
• rule win: 1 step to the left and 3 steps up
• key: 2 steps to the right and 2 steps up
• rule key: 1 step to the right and 1 step up
• rule baba: 3 steps to the left and 2 steps down
• rule is: 2 steps to the left and 2 steps down
• rule you: 1 step to the left and 2 steps down
• ball: 2 steps down
• rule ball: 2 steps to the right and 2 steps down
First, think about the best course of action. Then, you must choose exactly one of the listed actions
and output it strictly in the following format:
<|ACTION|>YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION<|END|>
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Iteration 2 Baba-is-ai Prompt
Baba Is You is a puzzle game where you can manipulate the rules of each level. The following are
the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action:
• idle: wait for one step,
• up: take one step up,
• right: take one step to the right,
• down: take one step down,
• left: take one step to the left.
You solve the puzzle by identifying the type of sub-problem, and then applying the following
blocks of solution steps:
1. If the win condition is not blocked and its rule is active, move to the win condition object.
2. If the win condition is blocked by a wall and "wall is stop" rule is active and not bounded
by the map boundary:
(a) Move into the "wall is stop" blocks to remove the rule.
(b) Move to the win condition object.
3. If the win condition is blocked by a wall and "wall is stop" rule is active and bounded by
the map boundary:
(a) Locate and move to an object rule block on your side of the wall.
(b) Push the object rule block towards the "baba is you" rule block by moving into it, and
use this rule block to push the "baba" block out of the "baba is you" rule block.
4. If the win condition is not active:
(a) Locate the object rule block that can be pushed to the "is" rule block to activate the
win condition.
(b) Push the object rule block to the "is" rule block, making sure they are adjacent.
(c) Move to the win condition object.
5. If the win condition object is not present:
(a) Locate an object rule block that can be pushed to the "is" rule block to create the win
condition object.
(b) Push the object rule block to the "is" rule block, making sure they are adjacent.
(c) Move to the win condition object.
Example:
If your observation is:
Active rules: wall is stop baba is you
Objects on the map: wall 3 steps to the right and 3 step up
rule is 7 steps to the right and 3 step up
rule win 8 steps to the right and 3 step up
rule wall 2 step to the left and 2 step up
rule is 1 step to the left and 2 step up
rule stop 2 step up
wall 3 steps to the right and 2 step up
wall 3 steps to the right and 1 step up
key 4 steps to the right and 1 step up
wall 3 steps to the right
rule ball 7 steps to the right
wall 3 steps to the right and 1 step down
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
wall 3 steps to the right and 2 steps down
rule baba 2 step to the left and 3 steps down
rule is 1 step to the left and 3 steps down
rule you 3 steps down
wall 3 steps to the right and 3 steps down
ball 4 steps to the right and 3 steps down
You should plan your actions as follows:
1. The win condition is not active, so it needs to be built.
2. The win rule can be built by pushing the "ball" block on the other side of the wall next to
the "is" block.
3. The "wall is stop" rule is blocking the path to the ball, so you should remove this rule first.
4. The "wall is stop" rule is not bounded by walls, so you can move the blocks to remove the
rule.
• Move 2 steps to the left and 2 steps up to reach the "wall is stop" rule, and push the
"wall" block to remove the rule.
5. Once the "wall is stop" rule is removed, you can push the "ball" block to the "is" block to
win.
• Move 7 steps to the right, 3 steps down to reach the "ball" block.
• Move 3 steps up to push the "ball" block to the "is" block.
6. Once you detect the "ball is win" rule as being active, you can move directly to the ball to
win.
PLAY!
Current Observation:
Active rules: ball is win baba is you
Objects on the map:
• rule ball: 3 steps to the left and 3 steps up
• rule is: 2 steps to the left and 3 steps up
• rule win: 1 step to the left and 3 steps up
• ball: 3 steps to the left and 2 steps up
• key: 3 steps to the left and 1 step up
• rule baba: 3 steps to the left and 2 steps down
• rule is: 2 steps to the left and 2 steps down
• rule you: 1 step to the left and 2 steps down
First, think about the best course of action. Then, you must choose exactly one of the listed actions
and output it strictly in the following format:
<|ACTION|>YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION<|END|>
Replace YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION with the chosen action.
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Iteration 3 Baba-is-ai Prompt
Baba Is You is a puzzle game where you can manipulate the rules of each level. The following are
the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action:
• idle: wait for one step,
• up: take one step up,
• right: take one step to the right,
• down: take one step down,
• left: take one step to the left.
You solve the puzzle by identifying the type of sub-problem, and then applying the following
blocks of solution steps:
1. If the win condition is not blocked and its rule is active, move to the win condition object.
2. If the win condition is blocked by a wall and "wall is stop" rule is active and not bounded
by the map boundary:
(a) Move into the "wall is stop" blocks to remove the rule.
(b) Move to the win condition object.
3. If the win condition is blocked by a wall and "wall is stop" rule is active and bounded by
the map boundary:
(a) Locate and move to an object rule block on your side of the wall.
(b) Push the object rule block towards the "baba is you" rule block by moving into it, and
use this rule block to push the "baba" block out of the "baba is you" rule block.
4. If the win condition is not active:
(a) Locate the object rule block that can be pushed to the "is" rule block to activate the
win condition.
(b) Push the object rule block to the "is" rule block, making sure they are adjacent.
(c) Move to the win condition object.
5. If the win condition object is not present:
(a) Locate an object rule block that can be pushed to the "is" rule block to create the win
condition object.
(b) Push the object rule block to the "is" rule block, making sure they are adjacent.
(c) Move to the win condition object.
Example:
If your observation is:
Active rules:
wall is stop
baba is you
Objects on the map:
rule wall at (1, 1)
rule is at (2, 1)
rule stop at (3, 1)
rule is at (7, 3)
rule win at (8, 3)
rule ball at (7, 0)
rule baba at (5, 6)
rule is at (6, 6)
32

--- Page 33 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
rule you at (7, 6)
wall at (4, 0), (4, 1), (4, 2), (4, 3), (4, 4), (4, 5), (4, 6)
key at (5, 1)
ball at (5, 6)
Current position: (4, 3) in a grid of shape (1, 0) to (8, 6)
You should plan your actions as follows:
1. The win condition is not active, so it needs to be built.
2. The win rule can be built by pushing the ball block on the other side of the wall next to
the is block.
3. The "wall is stop" rule is blocking the path to the ball, so you should remove this rule first.
4. The "wall is stop" rule is not bounded by walls, so you can move the blocks to remove the
rule.
• Move 2 steps to the left and 2 steps up to reach the "wall is stop" rule, and push the
wall block to remove the rule.
5. Once the rule is removed, you can push the ball block to the is block.
• Move 7 steps to the right and 3 steps down to reach the ball block.
• Move 3 steps up to push the ball block to the is block.
6. Once you detect the ball is win rule is active, move directly to the ball to win.
PLAY!
Current Observation:
Active rules:
baba is you
Objects on the map:
• rule is: at (2, 1)
• rule win: at (3, 1)
• key: at (6, 2)
• rule key: at (3, 4)
• door: at (6, 5)
• rule baba: at (1, 6)
• rule is: at (2, 6)
• rule you: at (3, 6)
• rule door: at (6, 6)
Current position: (4, 3) in a grid of shape (1, 1) to (6, 6)
Rule block pushing physics explanation:
• Avoid moving into any non-wall rule block unless you are ready to interact with it.
• Do not push "wall is stop" blocks if the "wall is stop" rule is not currently active.
Steps to avoid unwanted interaction:
1. Read all rule block positions.
2. Read your current position and direction.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3. If a rule block is in your path, change direction by 90° (e.g., if going up, go left or right).
4. If a rule is on the wall of the grid, it can only be pushed parallel to that wall.
Example:
If you are at (3, 3) and a rule block is at (3, 4), you cannot push it up by first moving down. Instead,
move to (2, 3) or (4, 3), then move down to (3, 6) to push it upward.
Strategic Planning:
First, think about your current goal based on the game state. If an active rule changes, your goal
likely changes too.
Most Important Rule: If "wall is stop" is active, find a way to remove it or gain control of a
different object before doing anything else.
Pushing Strategy:
• Always push blocks upward first (maximum 10 spaces), then push them left or right.
• Rule blocks are written in backticks. Objects are not. Only blocks can be pushed.
• Never interact directly with the is or win blocks.
Rule Construction Example:
If win is at (11, 1) and is is at (10, 1), place the object rule at (9, 1) to form a valid rule.
Coordinate System:
• Top-left is (1, 1), bottom-right is (x, y).
• Moving right increases x, moving down increases y.
Goal Planning Example:
Active rules:
• wall is stop — Must be broken under all circumstances!
Steps to achieve the goal:
1. Break "wall is stop" by moving into its blocks from below.
2. Build "ball is win" rule.
3. ball block is at (7, 4), is is at (8, 1). So:
• ball needs to move 3 steps up, 1 step right.
• Push from the left (1 step) and from below (3 steps).
4. If you’re at (6, 4), move 1 step down and 1 step right to reach (7, 5), then push from below.
5. Move 3 steps up.
Then, you must choose exactly one of the listed actions and output it strictly in the following format:
<|ACTION|>YOUR_CHOSEN_ACTION<|END|>
34

--- Page 35 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
I
QUALITATIVE OBSERVATIONS OF BABA-IS-AI AGENT PERFORMANCE
The metrics induced by AutoLibra capture the behavior of the agent effectively, with coverage increasing
from 65% at Iteration 0 to 92% at Iteration 3 and a low mean redundancy of 56%. Notably, earlier metrics
were found to describe higher-level behaviors than later metrics, reflective of the more complex behaviors
that the agent demonstrated in later iterations, as well as the compositionality of induced metrics. Code
changes were selected to specifically target given metrics, and the agent’s performance on the targeted
metric improved significantly in the iteration following the code change. This demonstrates the utility
of AutoLibra for fine-grained agent improvement, as well as the human interpretability of the induced
metrics.
The section below discusses iteration-by-iteration induced metrics, code changes directed by the metrics,
and the results of these code changes on agent environment and trajectory performance.
Iteration 0 The agent behavior is stochastic and inconsistent, with no clear strategy or goal. Any progress
in the environment is the consequence of a random walk. Win Condition Recognition
was identified as a prerequisite to all other metrics induced in this iteration, as progress in the environ-
ment is impossible without recognizing the win condition, and was therefore targeted for improvement.
Improvements took the form of few-shot prompting, by supplying an example of observations and the
corresponding win condition and subtasks, and guidance on subtask-level planning, by mapping specific
environmental observations to actions that would progress the agent towards the win condition. Iteration
1 An increase in
performance of 22% was observed between Iteration 0 and Iteration 1, indicating
that the code changes were effective in improving the agent’s ability to recognize the win condition. A
slight but statistically insignificant increase was observed for the other metrics induced in Iteration 0, but
the agent’s overall baba-is-ai environment score increased by 10%, indicating that
was correctly
identified by AutoLibra as a key bottleneck to the agent’s performance in the environment.
The agent now targets specific blocks and objects instead of moving randomly, but gets stuck in loops and
on immovable objects, and is unable to consistently complete multi-step tasks.
Based on the metrics induced in Iteration 1, several changes to the agent code were implemented:
• Augmentation of existing subtask-level planning guidance with low-level position instructions,
targeting improvement of Rule Modification for Obstacle Management
and Direct Navigation Efficiency
• Meta-prompting Suzgun & Kalai (2024) by providing subtask identification heuristic, target-
ing improvement of Selective Interaction with Relevant Objects
and
Context-Sensitive Decision Making
• Augmentation of single-shot example with movement instructions, targeting improvement of
Rule Manipulation and
Execution
Iteration 2 Substantial improvements in
were observed due to more detailed single-shot examples
and reasoning templates, and the corresponding increase in other metrics supports idea that
is a
key bottleneck to the agent’s performance. We further observed a significant increase in
and
, indicating that the changes targeting these metrics were effective in improving the agent’s reasoning
performance and consequent avoidance of irrelevant objects. Subtask Identification
saw
no significant improvement, as the agent still misunderstands map directions and confuses rule blocks with
objects.
Qualitatively, the agent now recognizes when wall rules need to be broken and breaks them, but still cannot
assemble rules to win, as it gets stuck on immovable blocks and walls and does not understand where rule
blocks need to be placed to form a win condition.
Based on the metrics induced in Iteration 2, several changes to the agent code were implemented:
35

--- Page 36 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Formatting observations as absolute position (as opposed to relative steps from the agent),
and listing of immovable/movable blocks to improve Direct Navigation Efficiency
• Chain-of-thought reasoning to assemble subtask completion agenda based on iteration-to-iteration
observations, targeting improvement of Subtask Coordination and Overall Task
Planning
• Augmentation of single-shot example to few-shot example with reasoning templates, targeting
improvement of Rule Manipulation and Execution
• Explicit instructions on navigation to avoid block collisions and assembly of rules, including
movement templates, targeting improvement of Rule Manipulation and Execution
and Win Rule Construction
Iteration 3 We observe a large increase in
and
, indicating that the changes targeting these
metrics were effective in improving the agent’s reasoning performance and consequent avoidance of
irrelevant objects.
saw further improvement, indicating that the use of absolute position and
immovable/movable block listing was effective in improving the agent’s navigation efficiency.
saw a slight increase, indicating that the changes targeting this metric were effective in improving the
agent’s ability to manipulate rules to achieve the win condition.
saw its first improvement, indicating
that more complex metrics are effectively targeted when the base performance and simpler metrics are
improved.
Qualitatively, nearly every agent always understands when wall rules can be and cannot be broken, as
well as when it’s not necessary to break the wall rule, covers nearly all tasks that involve going to win.
The agent understands how to assemble win rules but still struggles with changing block direction and
understanding that blocks get stuck against walls.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J
MINIHACK RULES AND ENVIRONMENT CONFIGURATION
Figure 11: Overview of representative tasks used in MiniHack agent optimization process with
AutoLibra. From left to right, up to down: (1) Boxoban, (2) MazeWalk, (3) Corridor Fight, and (4)
Quest.
This section discusses the rules and implementation details of MiniHack, another task environment used in
experiments in Section 4. Similarly to Baba is AI, MiniHack is derived from a grid-based puzzle video
game (NetHack), and was originally implemented as part of the BALROG Paglieri et al. (2024) agent
benchmark.
MiniHack is a grid navigation game expressed in text similar to baba-is-ai, consisting of a procedurally
generated environment that requires the agent to navigate a space consisting of various agent roles,
creatures, items, and tasks to reach a goal Samvelyan et al. (2021). Given its plasticity and abundant
elements, MiniHack is more complex, challenging, and diversified than baba-is-ai; this is reflected in a
lower success rate for agents on MiniHack versus Baba is AI, with a baseline agent task completion rate of
10% on MiniHack vs 33% on baba-is-ai Paglieri et al. (2024).
Similar to our experiments with baba-is-ai, the Ladder improvement process for MiniHack also follows
the algorithm detailed in Appendix B. Two full iterations of agent improvement with AutoLibra were
performed on MiniHack. Four representative tasks for MiniHack are used in iterative metric improvement,
with the remainder held out for evaluation. The agent is evaluated on the MiniHack environment and
any changes to the agent code at the beginning of each iteration, and the environment score, trajectory
performance, and other metrics are recorded at the end of each iteration. GPT-4o-241120 is used as the
agent model.
The four selected representative tasks each contain a unique subset of subtasks evaluating an agent’s
capability. Figure 11 shows an example for each task, and from left to right, up to down, these maps
respectively represent Boxoban, MazeWalk, Corridor Fight, and Quest.
Boxoban is a box-pushing puzzle game inspired by Sokoban, rendered within the MiniHack environment.
To succeed in Boxoban, the agent needs to push the four boulders (orange balls) onto the four fountains
(blue icons), and partial credit will be awarded for pushing some of the boulders onto the fountains.
Boxoban tests the agent’s capability in strategic planning and rule-following.
MazeWalk is a game that requires the agent to explore unknown dark spaces to find the target
exit staircase (the icon with a downward arrow). Two challenges for MazeWalk are fog of war – the agent
initially lacks information about areas of the map it hasn’t visited, and must explore to discover the map
and maze layout, and darkness – even if the agent has visited a block, the block will become ’dark’ as
the agent walks away and it passes out of view, retaining information about its layout but not any en-
emies or items present. Thus, MazeWalk tests the agent’s capability in map memory and strategic searching.
Corridor Fight is a game that requires the agent to explore an unknown dark corridor map to
find the target exit staircase while engaging or avoiding giant rat enemies. Corridor Fight tests the agent’s
capability in memory, space awareness, hazard awareness, and strategic combat.
Quest requires the agent to use a tool to help itself cross an otherwise impassable wall of lava,
survive randomly generated monsters, and search for the target exit staircase. As the most subtask-rich and
37

--- Page 38 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
randomized game, it tests the agent’s abilities to recognize and utilize tools, understand its role and special
power, and strategically survive from monsters.
In all tasks, the agent is provided observations in a text form, which includes the current state of the game
field, the currently active rules, and relative locations of obstacles to the active player character in terms
of shortest Manhattan distance. This is done to make the environment compatible with purely text-based
language models.
The environment is limited to 100 steps per task episode to avoid tasks being solved by random walks.
K
MINIHACK EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Turn
0
1
2
Baseline
MiniHack Score GPT-4o
0%
12.5%
25%
10%
Average Env. Steps
85
91
88
-
Table 5: MiniHack Score and Average Environment Steps
L
MINIHACK METRIC PERFORMANCE
Iteration
0
1
2
Target Navigation Effectiveness
16.67%
8.33%
41.67%
Efficient Exploration and Map Memory Uti-
lization
16.67%
0.00%
25.00%
Hazard Awareness and Equipment Utiliza-
tion
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Boulder Manipulation Strategy
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Combat Engagement and Survival
8.33%
8.33%
25.00%
Role-Specific Ability Utilization
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Spatial Awareness and Interpretation
-
16.67%
58.33%
Object Pickup Efficiency
-
0.00%
0.00%
Giant Rats Encounter Handling
-
-
25.00%
Coverage
82.89%
81.82%
87.84%
Redundancy
61.11%
65.63%
71.30%
Table 6: Metric Performance for MiniHack AutoLibra Iterations 0–2
38

--- Page 39 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
M
MINIHACK METRIC EXAMPLES
Iteration 0: Target Navigation Effectiveness
Explanation:
This metric evaluates the agent’s ability to accurately identify and navigate toward key goal
locations (e.g., the downward stairs). Positive behaviors show clear planning and directional focus,
while negative examples reveal distractions or failures in goal-oriented movement.
Good Behaviors:
• Behavior: The agent decides to move south and reaches the downward stairs.
• Behavior: The agent’s reasoning shows it plans its action to reach the stairs.
• Behavior: From its reasoning, the agent appears to recognize the goal of locating the
stairs downward.
• Behavior: From the trajectory and reasoning, the agent consistently aimed toward the
general direction of its goal—the stairs down.
Bad Behaviors:
• Behavior: The repeated attempts to kick the goblin instead of progressing towards the
stairs.
• Behavior: The agent repeatedly interacts with adjacent stairs up but does not visibly
attempt to identify or locate downward stairs.
• Behavior: The agent explored the map but did not identify the downward stair in its
trajectory.
• Behavior: Throughout the trajectory, the agent did not manage to locate the downward
stairs, despite exploring various places in the environment.
• Behavior: The agent spends multiple actions traversing the map without making mean-
ingful progress toward the downward stairs.
• Behavior: Performed in the sequence of actions where the agent explores but eventually
doesn’t find the stairway downward, ending the session unsuccessfully.
• Behavior: During its navigation, the agent didn’t succeed in reaching the stairs down.
39

--- Page 40 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
N
MINIHACK PROMPTS
Iteration 0 MiniHack Prompt
You are an agent playing MiniHack. The following are the possible actions you can take in the game,
followed by a short description of each action:
• north: move north,
• east: move east,
• south: move south,
• west: move west,
• northeast: move northeast,
• southeast: move southeast,
• southwest: move southwest,
• northwest: move northwest,
• far north: move far north,
• far east: move far east,
• far south: move far south,
• far west: move far west,
• far northeast: move far northeast,
• far southeast: move far southeast,
• far southwest: move far southwest,
• far northwest: move far northwest,
• up: go up the stairs,
• down: go down the stairs,
• wait: rest one move while doing nothing,
• more: display more of the message,
• apply: apply (use) a tool,
• close: close an adjacent door,
• open: open an adjacent door,
• eat: eat something,
• force: force a lock,
• kick: kick an enemy or a locked door or chest,
• loot: loot a box on the floor,
• pickup: pick up things at the current location if there are any,
• pray: pray to the gods for help,
• puton: put on an accessory,
• quaff: quaff (drink) something,
• search: search for hidden doors and passages,
• zap: zap a wand
For task which name consists "corridor": Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
For task which name consists “quest”: Your goal is to explore the level, fight monsters, and navigate
rooms and mazes to ultimately reach the stairs down.
For task which name consists “boxoban”: You are playing Boxoban, a box-pushing game inspired by
Sokoban. Your goal is to push the boulders onto the fountains on the map. You can push the boulders by
walking into them, as long as there are no obstacles behind them.
For task which name consists “mazewalk”: Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Otherwise: Your goal is to get as far as possible in the game.
In a moment I will present a history of actions and observations from the game.
Tip: there is no point in outputting the same action over and over if nothing changes.
Additional Feedback (if provided): I will also present lists of positive and negative feedback based
on your previous attempts on this task, use this information to change your strategy and improve your
performance. Positive:
positive Negative:
negative
PLAY!
Iteration 1 MiniHack Prompt
You are an agent playing MiniHack. The following are the possible actions you can take in the game,
followed by a short description of each action:
• north: move north,
• east: move east,
• south: move south,
• west: move west,
• northeast: move northeast,
• southeast: move southeast,
• southwest: move southwest,
• northwest: move northwest,
• far north: move far north,
• far east: move far east,
• far south: move far south,
• far west: move far west,
• far northeast: move far northeast,
• far southeast: move far southeast,
• far southwest: move far southwest,
• far northwest: move far northwest,
• up: go up the stairs,
• down: go down the stairs,
• wait: rest one move while doing nothing,
• more: display more of the message,
• apply: apply (use) a tool,
• close: close an adjacent door,
• open: open an adjacent door,
• eat: eat something,
• force: force a lock,
• kick: kick an enemy or a locked door or chest,
• loot: loot a box on the floor,
• pickup: pick up things at the current location if there are any,
• pray: pray to the gods for help,
• puton: put on an accessory,
• quaff: quaff (drink) something,
• search: search for hidden doors and passages,
41

--- Page 42 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• zap: zap a wand
For task name contains “corridor”:
Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
Notes:
1. The target stairs down is always at the other room on the map, so you should prioritize exploring
the other room.
2. Whenever you encounter a monster (giant rat) in a room, you should always try to run to the
direction of the corridor.
3. Whenever you encounter a monster (giant rat) on the corridor, you should always try to kill the
monster (giant rat).
4. Once you reach the second room on the map, you should explore the room fully to find the
target stairs down, but whenever you encounter a monster (giant rat), you should always try to
run to the direction of the corridor.
Example:
---
.<|
..@#
.|
For task name contains “quest”:
Your goal is to explore the level, fight monsters, and navigate rooms and mazes to ultimately reach the
stairs down.
Notes:
1. You should never cross (lava) without necessary ability or equipment.
2. Always explore the area approachable (no need to cross the lava) well enough to find sufficient
support. Below is an example:
Map Example:
--------------
|@....}......---
|.(...}.......F-
|.....}.....................|
|.....}........--------
|
|.....}......---
--------------
3. You should always try to apply the tool you can get, even though you do not know the effect.
4. You should always try to apply your role’s ability, even though you do not know the effect.
For task name contains “boxoban”:
You are playing Boxoban, a box-pushing game inspired by Sokoban. Your goal is to push the boulders
onto the fountains on the map. You can push the boulders by walking into them, as long as there are no
obstacles behind them.
Notes: For this task, you should follow the below rules with priority from top to down:
1. You should remember the locations of the fountains in the beginning.
2. You should never push a boulder in a direction if in this direction, the next spot next to the
boulder is not empty or is not the fountain.
3. You should never push a boulder to any L-shaped wall configuration (two adjacent walls).
Example (dead corner):
42

--- Page 43 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
##########
#‘.....###
4. You should never push a boulder next to a wall unless, in the direction perpendicular to the
line joining the boulder and its neighbor wall, there is at least one fountain left open such that
between this fountain and the boulder all spots are empty.
5. You should never push a boulder if it is already on the fountain.
6. If a boulder and a fountain are on the same row or column, and all spots between this boulder
and this fountain are empty, and the first spot next to the boulder on the opposite direction of
which the fountain locates is empty, you should always push this boulder to the corresponding
fountain.
Map Example (established path):
##########
#......<##
#.#@.{‘.##
#.‘‘##.#.#
#..‘...{.#
#.#.{....#
#######.{#
#######..#
#######..#
##########
Example (dead corner reminder):
##########
#‘.....###
For task name contains “mazewalk”:
Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
Notes: For this task, your action space will be limited to:
{"north": "move north",
"east":
"move east",
"south": "move south",
"west":
"move west"}
You will not choose any actions other than these four. Follow strictly:
1. If the block on your east is empty, move east.
2. If east is blocked and north is open, move north.
3. If east and north are both blocked, and west is open, move west.
4. If east, north, and west are blocked, move south.
Otherwise:
Your goal is to get as far as possible in the game.
In a moment I will present a history of actions and observations from the game.
Tip: there is no point in outputting the same action over and over if anything changes.
PLAY!
Iteration 2 MiniHack Prompt
You are an agent playing MiniHack. The following are the possible actions you can take in the game:
43

--- Page 44 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• north: move north,
• east: move east,
• south: move south,
• west: move west,
• northeast: move northeast,
• southeast: move southeast,
• southwest: move southwest,
• northwest: move northwest,
• far north: move far north,
• far east: move far east,
• far south: move far south,
• far west: move far west,
• far northeast: move far northeast,
• far southeast: move far southeast,
• far southwest: move far southwest,
• far northwest: move far northwest,
• up: go up the stairs,
• down: go down the stairs,
• wait: rest one move while doing nothing,
• more: display more of the message,
• apply: apply (use) a tool,
• close: close an adjacent door,
• open: open an adjacent door,
• eat: eat something,
• force: force a lock,
• kick: kick an enemy or a locked door or chest,
• loot: loot a box on the floor,
• pickup: pick up things at the current location if there are any,
• pray: pray to the gods for help,
• puton: put on an accessory,
• quaff: quaff (drink) something,
• search: search for hidden doors and passages,
• zap: zap a wand
For task name contains “corridor”:
Your goal: Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
Notes:
Most important notice before you start: "." in the map means room, so if your current space is marked
by "." you are in the room. In the map, "#" means corridor. You should never misrecognize the type
of location you are currently at as this is crucial for your game. Always be certain about your current
location before you decide an action.
You should permanently treat “<” the same as “.”
1. The target stairs down is always at the other room on the map, so you should prioritize exploring
the other room. Remember, the goal spot is always at the far east of the map.
2. Whenever you haven’t moved onto the corridor (“#”) yet, find one “#” as soon as possible and
move onto it.
44

--- Page 45 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Example:
---
.<|
..@#
.|
Example:
-----
|..<|
|@...
|...|
-----
3. Whenever you encounter a monster (giant rat) in a room, you should always try to run to the
direction of the corridor. As soon as you reach the second block on the corridor, you should
stop running away after moving west for a max of 3 steps and start fighting the rat. Fight until
there are no rats on your adjacent spots.
Example:
----
---
...|
|r...%
|....#######@r....
|<..|
|r....
----
---
You should only fight the rat when there is exactly one rat adjacent (in the 8 surrounding spots).
4. Whenever you encounter a monster (giant rat) on the corridor, you should always try to kill the
monster immediately. Never retreat back into the room.
Example:
-----
|...|
|....##%##@r.
|..<|
----
Example:
-----
|...|
|....@r##%##.
|..<|
----
5. Once you reach the second room on the map, you should explore the room fully to find the
target stairs down, but whenever you encounter a monster, you should always try to run to the
direction of the corridor. Once in the second room, never return to the corridor or first room
unless actively fleeing a monster.
Example:
----
|...|
|..............
|<.%.#%#####............@..
|...|
|..............
----
45

--- Page 46 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
6. In case you return to the first room (where you can see “<”), immediately find the corridor “#”
again and go east as much as possible.
For task name contains “quest”:
Your goal: Your goal is to explore the level, fight monsters, and navigate rooms and mazes to ultimately
reach the stairs down.
Notes:
1. You should never cross }(lava) without necessary ability or equipment.
2. Always explore approachable areas (no need to cross the lava) well enough to find sufficient
support. Below is an example:
Map Example:
--------------
|@....}......---
|.(...}.......F-
|.....}.....................|
|.....}........--------
|
|.....}......---
--------------
3. You should always try to apply the tool you can get, even if you do not know its effect.
4. You should always try to apply your role’s ability, even if you do not know its effect.
For task name contains “boxoban”:
Your goal: You are playing Boxoban, a box-pushing game inspired by Sokoban. Your goal is to push the
boulders onto the fountains on the map. You can push the boulders by walking into them, as long as there
are no obstacles behind them.
Notes: For this task, follow these rules in priority order:
1. Remember the locations of the fountains at the start.
2. Never push a boulder if the next spot is not empty or not a fountain.
3. Never push a boulder into an L-shaped wall configuration (two adjacent walls).
Example (dead corner):
##########
#‘.....###
Visual Deadlock Examples (NEVER DO THESE):
Case 1: Before Push:
##########
##########
#<########
#.########
#.########
#..{.#####
#@.‘‘#####
#‘{.‘{.###
#......###
##########
Action: Push South After Push:
##########
##########
#<########
#.########
46

--- Page 47 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
#.########
#..{.#####
#..‘‘#####
#@{.‘{.###
#‘.....###
##########
Result: Boulder stuck – can’t move due to walls.
Case 2: Before Push:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#.‘@..#
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Action: Push WEST After Push:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘@...#
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Result: Can’t move boulder any more.
More Thorough Examples:
Example 1 – Dead Corner: Before:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#.‘@..#
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
After pushing west:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘@...#
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
47

--- Page 48 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Example 2 – Dead Corner: Before:
##########
##########
#<########
#.########
#.########
#..{.#####
#@.‘‘#####
#‘{.‘{.###
#......###
##########
After pushing south:
##########
##########
#<########
#.########
#.########
#..{.#####
#..‘‘#####
#@{.‘{.###
#‘.....###
##########
Example 3 – Dead Corner: Before:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘....#
#.@.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
After pushing north:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘....#
#...#.#.<#
#.@‘..##.#
##‘..{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Example 4 – Dead Corner: Before:
##########
####...{‘#
#..{‘....#
#.{.#.#.<#
#..‘..##.#
##.@‘.##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
48

--- Page 49 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
After pushing east:
##########
####...{‘#
#..{‘....#
#.{.#.#.<#
#..‘..##.#
##..@‘##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Terminal State Check: Remember all fountain locations initially. After each push, if a fountain spot “”
is covered by a boulder, mark that spot terminated.
Example 1 – Termination: Before:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘....#
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##@..{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
After pushing north:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘....#
#.‘.#.#.<#
#.@‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Example 2 – Termination: Before:
##########
####...{‘#
#..{‘@...#
#...#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
After pushing west:
##########
####...{‘#
#..‘@....#
#...#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
49

--- Page 50 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
4. You should never push a boulder next to a wall unless, in the perpendicular direction there remains an
open fountain with all intermediate spots empty. 5. You should never push a boulder if it is already on a
fountain. 6. If a boulder and a fountain are aligned in the same row or column, all intermediate spots
empty, and the spot behind the boulder (opposite the fountain) is empty, push toward the fountain.
Map Example (established path):
##########
#......<##
#.#@.{‘.##
#.‘‘##.#.#
#..‘...{.#
#.#.{....#
#######.{#
#######..#
#######..#
##########
7. Always explore to create more paths. 8. If a boulder is in a dead corner initially, do not waste steps
pushing it.
Example (dead corner reminder):
##########
#‘.....###
Below are two quick dead-corner examples:
Example 1:
##########
####...{‘#
#..#‘@...#
<-- Boulder in dead corner
#.{.#.#.<#
#.‘‘..##.#
##...{##.#
########.#
#####...{#
######...#
##########
Example 2:
##########
##########
#<########
#.########
#.########
#..{.#####
#..‘‘#####
#@{.‘{.###
#‘.....###
<-- Boulder in dead corner
Finally, a successful trajectory:
Example 1 – Beginning:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
50

--- Page 51 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘.‘..#
###.@.#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘.‘..#
###..@#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘@‘..#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘.@‘.#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘..@‘#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move south:
##########
51

--- Page 52 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
###.‘...‘#
###...#@.#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....{#
<----target this fountain
###.‘...‘#
###...#.@#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
<----boulder now on fountain
###.‘...@#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###.‘..@.#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###.‘.@..#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
52

--- Page 53 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###.‘@...#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move south:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###.‘....#
###..@#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###.‘....#
###.@.#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####‘...‘#
###.@....#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####‘#####
####@...‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
53

--- Page 54 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
##########
#...{..{.#
##.‘‘{.‘.#
####@#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...‘..{.#
##.‘@{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...‘..{.#
##.‘.@.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move north:
##########
#...‘@.{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...‘.@{.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
54

--- Page 55 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
##########
#...‘..@.#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move east:
##########
#...‘..{@#
##.‘.{.‘.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move south:
##########
#...‘..{.#
##.‘.{.‘@#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
##########
#...‘..{.#
##.‘.{‘@.#
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
move west:
##########
#...‘..{.#
##.‘.‘@..#
<--- now boulder on fountain
####.#####
####....‘#
###......#
###...#..#
####<#####
##########
##########
55

--- Page 56 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Now we have successfully pushed three boulders to the fountains.
For task name contains “mazewalk”:
Your goal: Your goal is to explore the level and reach the stairs down.
Notes: For this task, your action space is limited to:
{"north": "move north",
"east":
"move east",
"south": "move south",
"west":
"move west"}
You must only choose these four directions:
1. If the block on your east is empty, move east.
2. If east is blocked and north is open, move north.
3. If east and north are both blocked, and west is open, move west.
4. If east, north, and west are blocked, move south.
Absolute Wall-Following Protocol:
Core Principle: “Follow priority order, probe dark directions ONLY when they’re current priority.”
Movement Validation:
– Priority rotation ONLY occurs AFTER SUCCESSFUL MOVEMENT.
– Wall collisions preserve current priority order.
1. Initialization: CURRENT_PRIORITY = [EAST, NORTH, WEST, SOUTH]; permanent_walls
= {}. Move east until first wall.
2. At each position, check directions in CURRENT_PRIORITY:
• If visible (“.” or “<”), move immediately and rotate per rules.
• If dark, attempt move:
– Success: continue protocol.
– Wall collision: mark permanent_walls, skip direction, continue.
3. Rotation rules:
(a) 1st priority move: rotate clockwise (e.g. ENWS →SENW).
(b) 2nd priority: no rotation.
(c) 3rd priority: rotate counter-clockwise (ENWS →NWSE).
(d) 4th priority: reverse (swap 1↔3, 2↔4).
4. Terminal Condition: immediately go to stairs down (">") when visible; never treat "<" specially.
Walkthrough Example:
Initial: [E,N,W,S]
1. Move E until wall. 2. At start: E (wall) →N (open) →move north (no rotation). 3. Next: E (open) →
move east (rotate to SENW).
Otherwise:
Your goal: Your goal is to get as far as possible in the game.
In a moment I will present a history of actions and observations from the game.
Tip: there is no point in outputting the same action over and over if nothing changes.
PLAY!
56

--- Page 57 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Turn
Description
0
Target Navigation Effectiveness
0
Efficient Exploration and Map Memory
Utilization
0
Hazard Awareness and Equipment
Utilization
0
Boulder Manipulation Strategy
0
Combat Engagement and Survival
0
Role-Specific Ability Utilization
1
Spatial Awareness and Interpretation
1
Object Pickup Efficiency
2
Giant Rats Encounter Handling
Table 7: Metrics and Turn of Induction for MiniHack
O
QUALITATIVE OBSERVATIONS OF MINIHACK AGENT PERFORMANCE
The induced metrics and the agent’s per-task performance are shown in Table 7 and Table 6, respectively. A
substantial improvement in the agent’s task completion performance is observed from Iteration 1 to Iteration 2,
with the agent achieving both a higher environment score and trajectory performance on the held-out tasks
compared to the baseline agent. Specifically, the agent’s performance on metrics increased correspondingly to
code changes, like
improving from 16.67% to 41.67%, demonstrating the utility of AutoLibra for
fine-grained agent improvement. This is discussed in more detail in the following sections.
O.1
EXTRACTED METRICS AND IMPROVEMENTS
The metrics induced by AutoLibra (Table 7) capture the behavior of the agent through all iterations, with
coverage of 83% at Iteration 0 to 88% at Iteration 2. Due to the diversity of tasks, metrics pertain to one or two
tasks, matching the expectation that AutoLibra should generate fine-grained metrics. Notably, the metrics
generated at Iteration 0 are nearly comprehensive as they demonstrate good coverage of all four MiniHack tasks,
while the later metrics were found to specifically describe detailed behaviors for targeting one task each. Code
changes were selected to specifically target improvements in given metrics, and as seen in Table 6, the agent’s
performance on the targeted metric improved significantly in the iteration following the code change. This
demonstrates the utility of AutoLibra for fine-grained agent improvement, as well as the human interpretability
of the induced metrics. On the other hand, some metrics remain unchanged over iterations. The unchanged
metrics are
,
,
, and
. These metrics are all tightly related to Boxoban or Quest environments.
As these two environments contain high level of randomness, interactions with system, and sophisticated
planning, our prompt and example based guidance do not provide obvious improvements. This result also
indicates that simply coding might not be sufficient if the gap between the agent’s capability and the task’s
complexity is too significant.
Iteration 0 The agent’s behavior is stochastic and repetitive, with no utilization of memory, planning, and goal
awareness. Although the agent has reasoning before taking action, the decided action shows no correlation with
the goal or the environment. Target Navigation Effectiveness
was identified as the core
metric that evaluates the performance of all tasks except Boxoban. As all three other tasks require the agent to
explore the target exit stairs,
serves as the fundamental test of the agent’s goal awareness for these tasks.
Since Boxoban has a different winning condition, Boulder Manipulation Strategy
induced in
this iteration targets describing the overall goal awareness for the agent in Boxoban environment. The remaining
four metrics each cover two to three tasks on a more detailed level.
Based on the metrics induced in Iteration 0, several changes to the agent code were implemented:
57

--- Page 58 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Augmentation of subtask-level behavioral restriction guidance with the single-shot example, targeting
improvement of Boulder Manipulation Strategy
, Combat Engagement and
Survival
, and Hazard Awareness and Equipment Utilization
.
• Meta-prompting by providing subtask instructions targeting improvement of Role-Specific
Ability Utilization
.
• Augmentation of subtask-level winning strategy with few-shot example, targeting improvement of
Target Navigation Effectiveness
and Efficient Exploration and Map
Memory Utilization
.
Iteration 1 The changes made after Iteration 0 did not yield substantial improvements in agent task completion
performance, but behavior changes matching the metrics were observed and insights on prompt improvements
were obtained. A decrease in
performance of 8.3% was observed between Iteration 0 and Iteration 1,
indicating that the code changes confuse the agent which reduces their capability of goal recognition, and the
same reduction is also observed for
. Three causes of these reductions are recognized. Firstly, the overly
simplified strategy for MazeWalk provides no positive intuitions for the agent when loops exist in the map.
Secondly, the seemingly straightforward behavioral restrictions with examples do not appear sufficient enough
for the agent to avoid false action as the agent failed to comprehend the map thorough enough. Thirdly, the
randomness of Quest is so high that existing guidance fails to cover new randomly generated situations. Based
on Iteration 1’s result, MazeWalk and Corridor Fight both appear solvable given a more optimal strategy, and
Quest and Boxoban, given their high randomness and complexity, do not appear easily solvable, so providing
more examples seem to be the only direction of improvement. Moreover, two new metrics are induced, one
focusing on Corridor Fight and the other focusing on Quest.
Based on the metrics induced in Iteration 1, new changes are listed below:
• Augmentation of existing subtask-level advanced strategy with step-by-step decision-making
instructions and few-shot examples, targeting improvement of Target Navigation
Effectiveness
and Efficient Exploration and Map Memory
Utilization
.
• Augmentation of existing subtask-level strategy with corner cases handling guidance and few-shot
examples, targeting improvement of Combat Engagement and Survival
, Hazard
Awareness and Equipment Utilization
, and Spatial Awareness and
Interpretation
.
• Augmentation of existing few-shot examples with a full trajectory of the complete winning task,
targeting improvement of Boulder Manipulation Strategy
.
• Meta-prompting by providing more in-depth subtask instructions, targeting improvement of
Role-Specific Ability Utilization
and Object Pickup Efficiency
.
Iteration 2 We observe a significant increase in
and
indicating the code changes successfully improve
agent’s ability in goal awareness and goal reaching efficiency. Based on task-level observation, the agent
succeeded in most MazeWalk and Corridor Fight tasks. The large increase in
and
shows the agent’s
strong performance in the Corridor Fight task. More specifically, the agent now demonstrates both the capability
of choosing optimal action based on its current location and the capability of strategically handling dangerous
enemies—giant rats—in an emergency. The new induced metric also further proves the agent’s rat-handling
ability. For instance, when the agent encounters multiple rats at the same time, it will immediately retreat to the
middle of the single-way corridor to engage rats in combat individually. By doing so, the agent can easily beat
rats one by one and navigate to the goal without danger. However, as all the remaining metrics show no
improvements, we also observe the agent’s poor performance on Boxoban and Quest. This result shows that our
current targeting improvement strategy of adding abundant few-shot examples does not seem effective given the
gap between the agent’s reasoning ability and the high randomness and complexity of Boxoban and Quest. For
example, despite more than ten examples of pushing a boulder to a dead corner, a prohibited behavior has been
presented, the agent will still randomly push a boulder to the L-shaped dead corner formed by two walls which
causes this boulder to become immovable.
O.2
HELD-OUT TASK PERFORMANCE
For the held-out tasks, the agent task completion rate improved from Iteration 0 to Iteration 2, with scores from
0% to 25%. This result further proves that the improvements realized by AutoLibra are generalizable to unseen
tasks. However, some failed cases also provide valuable insights into prospective future iterations. For instance,
58

--- Page 59 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
the complete set of Corridor tasks consists of scenarios where the target downstairs may be located west of the
agent’s starting point, unlike Corridor Fight, where the target always lies to the east. Consequently, an
instruction that rigidly directs the agent to explore only eastward fails to generalize to the broader Corridor tasks.
This outcome underscores the importance of crafting instructions that are specific yet flexible: they should
provide sufficiently detailed, high-level strategies without relying on overly prescriptive, task-specific steps. By
focusing on generalizable principles rather than rigid directions, the agent is better equipped to adapt to a wider
range of scenarios while still benefiting from structured guidance. The agent’s performance on the held-out tasks
is shown in Table 5.
P
NNETNAV-LIVE INDUCED METRICS
It.
Metric
0
Navigation Accuracy
0
Search Term Accuracy
0
Information Extraction Details
0
Task Goal Achievement
0
Trajectory Efficiency
0
Barrier Avoidance
0
Navigation Loop Resolution
1
Subtask Coordination
1
UI Interaction Accuracy
2
Map Search Efficiency
2
Wish Cart Accuracy
3
News and Financial Information Retrieval
Table 8: Metrics for WebVoyager.
59