--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
RELATIVE ENTROPY PATHWISE
POLICY OPTIMIZATION
Claas A Voelcker1,2,∗, Axel Brunnbauer3,∗, Marcel Hussing4, Michal Nauman5,6,
Pieter Abbeel6, Eric Eaton4, Radu Grosu3, Amir-massoud Farahmand7,8,1,
Igor Gilitschenski1,2
1University of Toronto, 2Vector Institute, 3TU Wien, 4University of Pennsylvania
5University of Warsaw, 6UC Berkeley, 7Polytechnique Montr´eal, 8Mila – Quebec AI Institute
∗Authors contributed equally, correspondence to cvoelcker@cs.toronto.edu,
axel.brunnbauer@tuwien.ac.at
ABSTRACT
Score-function based methods for policy learning, such as REINFORCE and PPO,
have delivered strong results in game-playing and robotics, yet their high variance
often undermines training stability. Improving a policy through state-action value
functions, for example by differentiating Q with regard to the policy, alleviates
the variance issues. However, this requires an accurate action-conditioned value
function, which is notoriously hard to learn without relying on replay buffers for
reusing past off-policy data. We present Relative Entropy Pathwise Policy Opti-
mization, an algorithm that trains Q-value models purely from on-policy trajec-
tories, unlocking the use of Q function derivatives to compute policy updates in
the context of on-policy learning. We show how to combine stochastic policies
for exploration with constrained updates for stable training, and evaluate impor-
tant architectural components that stabilize value function learning. This results
in an efficient on-policy algorithm that combines the stability of Q-based pol-
icy gradients with the simplicity and minimal memory footprint of standard on-
policy learning. Compared to state-of-the-art on two standard GPU-parallelized
benchmarks, REPPO provides strong empirical performance at superior sample
efficiency, wall-clock time, memory footprint, and hyperparameter robustness.
On-policy Data
Actor
Critic
Q Learning
 
Policy gradients
Entropy Constraint
KL Constraint
REPPO Training
Core Algorithm Components
Evaluation Environments
Figure 1: Overview of the Relative Entropy Pathwise Policy Optimization algorithm. REPPO
combines four core components to achieve stable and fast actor-critic training across a wide variety
of reinforcement learning tasks. Isaac and Atari results can be found in the appendix. Implementa-
tions in different popular RL frameworks can be found at https://github.com/reppo-rl.
1
INTRODUCTION
Most modern on-policy algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) or PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), use a score-based gradient estimator to update the policy. These methods have proven use-
ful for robotic control (Rudin et al., 2022; Kaufmann et al., 2023; Radosavovic et al., 2024), and
language-model fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Pathwise estimation
Score-based estimation
Importance
Sampling
Value
Approximation
Gradient Estimation
Practical Computation
Figure 2: Overview of the strategies used by REPPO and PPO to obtain policy gradient estimators.
Computing the gradient requires a mathematical transformation that allows for efficient estimation
from samples, and additional steps that make the computation tractable in practice.
2024), but are often plagued by training instability. Zeroth-order, score-based gradient approxima-
tion exhibits high variance (Greensmith et al., 2004), which leads to unstable learning (Ilyas et al.,
2020; Rahn et al., 2023), especially in high-dimensional continuous spaces (Li et al., 2018). In ad-
dition, it requires importance sampling to allow sample reuse, which exacerbates the high variance.
Alternatively we can train a parameterized state-action value function (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Fuji-
moto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018), and use it to improve the policy, for example by using a
pathwise policy gradient (Silver et al., 2014), i.e. taking the derivative of the Q function wrt the
action. Using a parameterized function to improve the policy often leads to faster and more stable
learning learning by reducing the score-based estimators variance (Mohamed et al., 2020) and by
allowing us to remove importance sampling corrections.
However, the effectiveness of these approaches is bounded by the quality of the approximate value
function (Silver et al., 2014). As such, algorithms that use a state-action value function usually
rely on improving value learning through off-policy training (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al.,
2018). Unfortunately, off-policy training requires the use of replay buffers. Storing these replay
buffers can be a challenge when the collected samples cannot fit in memory. In addition, training
with past data introduces various challenges for value function fitting (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993;
Baird, 1995; Van Hasselt, 2010; Sutton et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2021; Nikishin et al., 2022; Lyle
et al., 2024; Hussing et al., 2024; Voelcker et al., 2025). This raises our core question:
Can we train a sufficiently correct value function approximation and effectively use it for
policy improvement in a fully on-policy setting without large replay buffers?
Building on the progress in accurate value function learning (Sutton, 1988; Haarnoja et al., 2019;
Schwarzer et al., 2021; Hussing et al., 2024; Farebrother et al., 2024), we present an efficient on-
policy algorithm, Relative Entropy Pathwise Policy Optimization (REPPO), which uses the pathwise
gradient estimator with an accurate value estimation trained on on-policy data. REPPO builds on the
maximum entropy framework (Ziebart et al., 2008) to encourage exploration. It combines this with
a KL regularization scheme, inspired by the Relative Entropy Policy Search method (Peters et al.,
2010), which prevents aggressive policy updates from destabilizing the optimization.
Furthermore, we evaluate several prominent advances in neural network architecture design to sta-
bilize learning: categorical Q-learning (Farebrother et al., 2024), normalized neural network archi-
tectures (Nauman et al., 2024a; Hussing et al., 2024), and auxiliary tasks (Jaderberg et al., 2017).
These components feature in many recent variants (Schwarzer et al., 2021; 2023; Nauman et al.,
2024a; Hussing et al., 2024; Gallici et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2025a;b; Nauman et al., 2025; Fujimoto
et al., 2024) of common value learning algorithm such as SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). We find that
categorical Q-learning and normalization have a strong impact on the performance, while auxiliary
tasks only show small impact, but become more relevant when reducing the amount of samples.
We test our approach in a variety of locomotion and manipulation environments from the Mujoco
Playground (Zakka et al., 2025) and ManiSkill (Tao et al., 2025) benchmarks, and show that REPPO
is competitive with tuned on-policy baselines in terms of sample efficiency and wall-clock time,
while using significantly smaller memory footprints than comparable off-policy algorithms. Fur-
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
thermore, we find that the proposed method is robust to the choice of hyperparameters. To this end,
our method offers stable performance across more than 30 tasks spanning multiple benchmarks with
a single hyperparameter set. In introducing REPPO, our work makes the following contributions:
1. We showcase that using a state-action value function and a pathwise policy gradient can
be effective in on-policy RL, as it allows on-policy action resampling, forgoing importance
corrections. However, this requires learning a highly accurate state-action value function.
2. We show how a joint entropy and policy deviation tuning objective can address the twin
problems of sufficient exploration and controlled policy updates.
3. We evaluate architectural components such as cross-entropy losses, layer normalization,
and auxiliary tasks for their efficacy in pathwise policy gradient-based on-policy learning.
We provide sample implementations in both the JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019) frameworks at https://github.com/reppo-rl.
2
BACKGROUND, NOTATION, AND DEFINITIONS
We consider the setting of the Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 1994) , defined by the
tuple (X, A, P, r, γ, ρ0), where X is the set of states, A is the set of actions, P(x′|x, a) is the
transition probability kernel, r(x, a) is the reward function, and γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor.
We write Pπ(x′|x) for the policy-conditioned transition kernel and Pn
π (y|x) for the n-step transi-
tion kernel. An agent interacts with the environment via a policy π(a|x), which defines a distri-
bution over actions given a state. The objective is to find a policy that maximizes the expected
discounted return, J(π) = Eπ [P∞
t=0 γtr(xt, at)] , where x0 ∼ρ0 is the initial state distribu-
tion, and at ∼π(·|xt). The state-action value function associated with a policy π are defined as
Qπ(x, a) = Eπ
hP∞
t=0 γtr(xt, at)
x0 = x, a0 = a
i
. We use µπ(y|x) to denote the discounted sta-
tionary distribution over states y when starting in state x. When x ∼µπ(·|y), y ∼ρ0, we will simply
write µπ(x) to denote the probability of a state under the discounted occupancy distribution.1
2.1
POLICY GRADIENT LEARNING
A policy gradient approach (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a general method for improving a (parame-
terized) policy πθ by estimating the gradient of the policy-return function J(πθ) with regard to the
policy parameters θ. The policy gradient theorem states that
∇θJ(πθ) = Ex∼µπ,a∼πθ(·|x)[Qπθ(x, a)∇θ log πθ(a|x)].
(1)
This identity is particularly useful as both the Q value and the stationary distribution can be estimated
by samples obtained from following the policy for sufficiently many steps in the environment.
An alternative approach is the deterministic policy gradient theorem (DPG) (Silver et al., 2014).
The estimator for the DPG relies on access to a differentiable state-action value function and a
deterministic differentiable policy πdet
θ
(x). While access to the true value function is an unrealistic
assumption, we can use a trained surrogate model, ˆQ, to obtain a biased estimate of the gradient
∇θJ(πθ) ≈Ex∼µπ[∇a ˆQπdet
θ (x, a)|a=πdet
θ
(x)∇θπdet
θ
(x)].
(2)
Finally, the DPG can be expanded to reparametrizable stochastic policies2. We term this the pathwise
policy gradient, following Mohamed et al. (2020), but the formulation has been used prominently in
prior work such as SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), just without a proper name. The gradient estimator
can be obtained from the following expectation
∇θJ(πθ) ≈Ex∼µπ,ϵ∼p(ϵ)[∇a ˆQπrep
θ (x, a)|a=πrep
θ
(x,ϵ)∇θπrep
θ
(x, ϵ)],
(3)
where πrep
θ
(x, ϵ) is a reparameterization of πθ(a|x).
To avoid notational clutter we will write
πθ(a|x) from now on to always mean the appropriate reparameterization.
1Many policy gradient methods use the undiscounted empirical state occupancy for optimization (Nota &
Thomas, 2020). While this could be considered an error, it is nonetheless a common approximation. REPPO
similarly uses empirical samples without accounting for the discount factor in the objective.
2We discuss an extension to non-reparametrizable, discrete policies in Appendix C.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Iteration
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Return
Comparison of Policy Optimization Methods
Score-based Policy Gradient
Pathwise Policy Gradient
Weak Surrogate PPG
Strong Surrogate PPG
SB PG Mean
DPG Mean
Weak Surrogate DPG Mean
Strong Surrogate DPG Mean
Optimum
(a) Achieved returns (left) and path of four policies trained with different gradient estimation methods. We
compare a score-function based policy gradient estimator (blue) with three variants of pathwise gradient es-
timators: using the ground truth objective function (orange), an inaccurate surrogate model (green), and an
accurate surrogate model (red). All PPG based methods show markedly reduced variance in the policy updates.
x1
x2
REINFORCE
x1
IS REINFORCE
x1
PPO (Clipped IS)
x1
Pathwise PG
(b) Gradient path over eight steps in the middle of the trajectory, visualized per algorithm for 8 steps. For
Reinforce and PPG, new samples are drawn at every step. For the importance sampling based algorithms, one
set of samples is sampled at the beginning and subsequent steps are conducted using importance sampling.
Figure 3: Visualization of gradient paths on a 2D example function.
2.2
UNDERSTANDING SOURCES OF HARMFUL VARIANCE IN GRADIENT ESTIMATION
To build additional intuition on the differences between different policy gradient estimators, we
conduct an illustrative experiment. Implementation details can be found in Appendix D.
We initialize four Gaussians and update their parameters to maximize J(µ, Σ) = Ex∼N(·|µ,Σ)[g(x)]
on a test function g(x) with four different methods: a score-based policy gradient (using Equa-
tion 1), a pathwise PG with the ground truth objective function, and two pathwise PGs using learned
approximations, one accurate and one inaccurate (all using Equation 3). We visualize the returns
and the path of the mean estimates in Figure 3a. In addition, we zoom in on the gradient paths of the
score-based estimator. We visualize 100 different eight step paths from the middle of the trajectory.
Here, in addition to the vanilla score-based estimator, we also show an importance sampling and a
clipped importance sampling estimator. These paths are visualized in Figure 3b.
The experiment shows that score-based gradient estimators have high variance, and can lead to
unstable policies which fail to optimize the target. In addition, while importance sampling increases
the sample efficiency of the algorithm, it greatly exacerbates these variance issues. We find that
clipping the ratio estimate, as proposed by Schulman et al. (2017), prevents catastrophic instability,
but does not reduce the variance substantially. On the other hand, using a pathwise gradients is
remarkably stable and exhibits small variance. However, it either requires access to the gradients of
the objective function, or a strong surrogate model.
To use pathwise gradients in on-policy learning, our goal is thus to learn a suitable value function that
allows us to estimate a low variance update direction without converging to a suboptimal solution.
3
RELATIVE ENTROPY PATHWISE POLICY OPTIMIZATION
Naively, we could take an off-policy algorithm like SAC and train it solely with data from the current
policy. However, as Seo et al. (2025) recently showed, this can quickly lead to unstable learning.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
To succeed in the on-policy regime, we need to be able to continually obtain new diverse data, and
compute stable and reliable updates. Combining a set of recent advances in both reinforcement
learning as well as neural network value function fitting, can satisfy these requirements. We first
introduce the core RL algorithm, and then elaborate on the architectural design of the method.
At its core, REPPO proceeds similar to other on-policy actor-critic algorithms through three distinct
phases: data gathering, value target estimation, and value and policy learning (see Algorithm 1).
To obtain diverse data, REPPO uses a maximum-entropy formulation, adapted to multi-step TD-
λ (Subsection 3.1), to encourage exploration. Finally, to ensure that policies do not collapse and
policy learning is stable, REPPO uses KL-constrained policy updates with a schedule that balances
entropy-driven exploration and policy constraints (Subsection 3.2).
3.1
VALUE FUNCTION LEARNING
Off-policy PPG methods like TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) mostly
use single step Q learning, i.e. they use only immediate rewards for value function updates. This
is paired with large replay buffers to stabilize learning. While on-policy algorithms cannot use past
policy data, they can instead use low bias multi-step TD targets for stabilization (Fedus et al., 2020).
Therefore, multi-step TD-λ targets form the basis for our value learning objective. Note that REPPO
is more closely related to SARSA than to Q-learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018), due to being on-policy.
In addition to multi-step returns, diverse data is crucial. To achieve a constant rate of exploration,
and prevent the policy from prematurely collapsing to a deterministic function, we leverage the
maximum entropy formulation for RL (Ziebart et al., 2008; Levine, 2018). The core aim of the
maximum entropy framework is to keep the policy sufficiently stochastic by solving a modified
policy objective which not only maximizes rewards but also penalizes the loss of entropy in the
policy distribution. The maximum-entropy policy objective (Levine, 2018) can be defined as
JME(πθ) = Eπθ
" ∞
X
t=0
γtr(xt, at) + αH[πθ(xt)]
#
,
(4)
where H[πθ(x)] is the entropy of the policy evaluated at x, and α is a hyperparameter which trades
off reward maximization and entropy maximization. REPPO combines the maximum entropy ob-
jective with TD-λ estimates, resulting in the following target estimate
G(n)(xt, at) =
n
X
k=t
γk−t(r(xk, ak) −α log π(ak|xk)) + γn+1Q(xn, an)
(5)
Gλ(x, a) =
1
PN
n=0 λn
N
X
n=0
λnG(n)(x, a),
(6)
where N is the maximum length of the future trajectory we obtain from the environment for the state-
action pair (x, a). Our implementation relies on the efficient backwards pass algorithm presented
by Daley & Amato (2019). Crucially, the targets are computed on-policy after a new data batch is
gathered, and the Q targets are not recomputed before gathering new data. Our Q learning loss is
LREPPO
Q
 ϕ|{xi, ai}B
i=1

= 1
B
B
X
i=1
HL

Qϕ(xi, ai), Gλ(xi, ai)

+ Laux(fϕ(xi, ai), x′
i),
(7)
where x′
i refers to the next state sample starting from xi, and HL is the HL-Gauss loss (see Subsec-
tion 3.3 and Subsection D.2), and Laux is presented in Subsection 3.3 and Subsection D.3.
Using purely on-policy targets allows us to remove several common off-policy stabilization compo-
nents from the value learning setup. REPPO does not require a pessimism bias, so we can forgo the
clipped double Q learning employed by many prior methods (Fujimoto et al., 2018). Tuning pes-
simistic updates carefully to allow for exploration is a difficult task (Moskovitz et al., 2021), so this
simplification increases the robustness of our method. We also do not need a target value function
copy, since we do not recompute the target at each step and it therefore remains on-policy.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.2
POLICY LEARNING
A core problem with value-based on-policy optimization is controlling the size of the policy update,
as the value estimate is only accurate on the data covered by the prior policy. A large policy update
can therefore destabilize learning (Kakade & Langford, 2002). This problem has led to the develop-
ment of constrained policy update schemes, where the updated policy is prevented from deviating
too much from the behavioral (Peters et al., 2010; Schulman et al., 2015). To control the deviation,
we use the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, also called the relative entropy (Peters et al., 2010),
as it can be justified theoretically through information geometry (Kakade, 2001; Peters & Schaal,
2008; Pajarinen et al., 2019), and is easy to approximate using samples.
Some works in the literature (Neumann, 2011; Sokota et al., 2022) claim that the reverse mode
might be preferable for policy constraints, as it is mode-seeking, and the forward mode is mode-
averaging. However, this intuition does not cleanly translate to our setting. As our policies are
unimodal tanh-squashed Gaussian, the main impact of the KL direction is that the reverse-mode
KL is entropy reducing. As we explicitly aim to increase the policy’s entropy using the maximum
entropy formulation, using forward-mode KL makes the optimization more stable.
Policy Optimization Objective
Our policy updates derive from a constrained optimization prob-
lem which includes both entropy and the KL constraint, and where θ′ is the behavior policy, and
εKL and εH are the respective KL and entropy constraints
max
θ
Ex∼ρπθ′

Ea∼πθ(·|x) [Q(x, a)]

(8)
subject to
Ex∼ρπθ′ [DKL (πθ′(·|x) ∥πθ(·|x))] ≤εKL
(9)
Ex∼ρπθ′ [H[πθ(·|x)]] ≥εH.
(10)
A similar combination of maximum entropy and KL divergence bound has been explored in vari-
ous forms (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015; Pajarinen et al., 2019; Akrour et al., 2019). However, while
previous approaches use complex solutions to this problem, such as approximate mirror descent,
line search, or heuristic clipping, we take a simpler approach. We relax the problem, which intro-
duces two hyperparameters, α for the entropy, and β for the KL. Inspired by Haarnoja et al. (2019),
REPPO automatically adapts these constraints when the policy violates them.
Policy Updates and Multiplier Tuning
In the constrained objective, we introduce two hyper-
parameters, εH and εKL, which bound the entropy and KL divergence. The goal of the Lagrangian
parameters is to ensure that the policy stays close to these constraints. As we need to ensure that
they remain positive, we update them in log space with a gradient based root finding procedure
α ←α −ηαeαEx∼ρπθ′ [(H[πθ(·|x)] −εH)]
(11)
β ←β −ηβeβEx∼ρπθ′ [(DKL(πθ′(·|x)∥πθ(·|x)) −εKL)] .
(12)
Finally, to ensure our KL constraint is (approximately) maintained, we clip the actor loss based on
whether the constrained is currently violated. The full policy objective for REPPO is now
LREPPO
π
(θ|xi) =
(
−Q(xi, a) + eα log πθ(a|xi),
if 1
k
Pk
j=1 log πθ′(aj|xi)
πθ(aj|xi) < εKL
eβ 1
k
Pk
j=1 log πθ′(aj|xi)
πθ(aj|xi) ,
otherwise
(13)
where a is sampled from πθ(·|xi) and aj from the past behavior policy πθ′(·|xi), and k denotes
how many samples are used to approximate the KL. As with the critic, the optimized loss is a mean
over a minibatch from the rollout data. Note that contrary to other on-policy algorithms like PPO
and TRPO, we are not forced to use actions sampled from the behavior policy in the policy gradient
estimator, which removes the need for importance sampling correction. We will show that this
greatly improves the performance of REPPO in Subsection 4.1.
Jointly tuning the entropy and KL multipliers is a crucial component of REPPO. As the policy
entropy and KL are tied, letting the entropy of the behavior policy collapse means the KL constraint
prevents any policy updates. Furthermore, the entropy and KL terms are balanced against the scale
of the returns in the maximum entropy formulation. As the returns increase, keeping the multipliers
fixed causes the model to ignore the constraints over time, accelerating collapse. However, as we
tune both in tandem, our setup ensures a steady, measured update rate of the policy.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.3
STABLE REPRESENTATION AND VALUE FUNCTION ARCHITECTURES
While the RL algorithm offers a strong foundation to obtain strong surrogate values, we also draw
on recent off-policy advances in value function learning that improve training through architecture
and loss design. We incorporate three major advancements into REPPO to further stabilize training.
Cross-entropy loss for regression
The first choice is to replace the mean squared error in the critic
update with a more robust cross-entropy based loss function. For this, REPPO uses the HL-Gauss
loss (Farebrother et al., 2024). This technique was adapted from the distributional C51 algorithm
(Bellemare et al., 2017), which can lead to stable learning algorithms. Inspired by this insight and
histogram losses for regression (Imani & White, 2018), Farebrother et al. (2024) hypothesize that
observed benefits are due to the fact that many distributional algorithms use a cross-entropy loss,
which is scale invariant. Palenicek et al. (2025) further investigate and reinforce this claim, showing
that stable gradients arise from cross-entropy based losses. We present the mathematical form of
the loss formulation in Subsection D.2. We find that a categorical loss is a crucial addition, as our
ablation experiments show (Subsection E.1), but alternatives like C51 could easily work as well.
Layer Normalization
Several recent works (Ball et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023; Lyle et al., 2024;
Nauman et al., 2024a; Hussing et al., 2024; Gallici et al., 2024) have shown the importance of layer
normalization (Ba et al., 2016) for stable critic learning. Gallici et al. (2024) provides a thorough
theoretical analysis of the importance of normalization in on-policy learning, while Hussing et al.
(2024) focuses on assessing the empirical behavior of networks in off-policy learning with and
without normalization. As we operate in an on-policy regime where value function targets are more
stable, we find that normalization is not as critical for REPPO as it is for off-policy bootstrapped
methods; yet, we still see performance benefits in most environments from normalization.
Auxiliary tasks
Auxiliary tasks (Jaderberg et al., 2017) can stabilize features in environments with
sparse rewards, where the lack of a reward signal can prevent learning meaningful representations
via the Q learning objective (Voelcker et al., 2024a). For REPPO, auxiliary tasks are especially
impactful when we decrease the number of samples used in each update batch (see Subsection E.1).
We provide a discussion of this auxiliary task setup, including the loss function, in Subsection D.3.
4
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We begin by evaluating whether pathwise estimators improve upon score-based estimation in on-
policy RL settings. We then compare our approach to baselines, evaluating final performance, sam-
ple and wall-clock efficiency, and stability of policy improvement. Our results demonstrate strong
performance of REPPO on all axes. Additional details on architectures, hyperparameters, and abla-
tions are provided in Subsection D.4 and Appendix E. A discrete variant of REPPO, along with its
architectural changes and experimental results, is presented in Appendix C.
Environments
We evaluate REPPO on two major GPU-parallelized benchmark suites: 23
tasks from the mujoco playground DMC suite (Zakka et al., 2025) and 8 ManiSkill environments
(Tao et al., 2025), covering locomotion and manipulation, respectively. These tasks span high-
dimensional control, sparse rewards, and chaotic dynamics.
0.60
0.75
0.90
REPPO (score-based, GAE)
PPO
REPPO (score-based, Q)
REPPO (pathwise)
Mean
0.60
0.75
0.90
Median
0.60
0.75
0.90
IQM
Normalized returns
Figure 4: Aggregate performance mujoco playground We compare REPPO with two ablations:
using the score-based gradient estimator with the learned Q function, and using an on-policy GAE
estimate with importance sampling and clipping. For additional context, we also report PPO results.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.6
0.7
0.8
RPO
DPO
SAC (Brax, 5M)
FastTD3 (32k buf.)
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
PPO (Brax, 200M)
PPO (Brax)
PPO
REPPO
Mean
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
Median
0.60
0.75
0.90
IQM
Normalized returns
(a) Aggregate performance mujoco playground. We compare REPPO to a re-tuned PPO baseline, the Brax
PPO and SAC implementations provided by Zakka et al. (2025), as well as FastTD3 (Seo et al., 2025), RPO
(Rahman & Xue, 2023), and DPO (Lu et al., 2022).
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
PPO (100M)
PPO
REPPO
Mean
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Median
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
IQM
Success Rate
(b) Aggregate success maniskill (Tao et al., 2025). We compare REPPO against a PPO baseline provided
by Tao et al. (2025) at 50 million environment steps. As some environments take more than 50 million steps
for PPO to achieve strong performance, we report the final performance at 100 million steps. While the mean
confidence intervals are very broad, REPPO performs strongly on the IQM and median metrics.
Figure 5: Aggregate performance comparison on (a) mujoco playground DMC and (b) ManiSkill3.
4.1
SCORE-BASED AND PATHWISE COMPARISON
REPPO offers an alternative to score-based policy gradient estimation in on-policy RL. However,
we also introduce several enhancements, including automated tuning of entropy and KL coefficients,
to improve value and policy learning. To assess the benefits of learned values and pathwise gradient
estimation over score-based methods, we conduct two experiments. First, we replace the pathwise
term −Q(x, a) in Equation 13 with the score function log π(a|x)[Q(x, a)]sg, denoted as REPPO
(score-based, Q). Second, we replace the gradient estimator with the GAE-based clipped objective
from PPO, denoted as REPPO (score-based, GAE). Aggregate results are presented in Figure 4.
Using the approximate Q function in the policy gradient objective provides a strong improvement
over a clipped objective. This showcases the benefits of value function learning and removing im-
portance sampling. This also shows that the REPPO framework can be used with policy classes
that are not amenable to reparameterization, such as diffusion policies (Chi et al., 2024; Celik et al.,
2025; Ma et al., 2025), by using a score-based estimator together with the learned Q function. Inter-
estingly, combining the PPO objective with REPPO leads to slightly worse results than vanilla PPO.
We find that the high variance complicates the automatic parameter tuning scheme.
4.2
BENCHMARK COMPARISON
We compare REPPO against the PPO and SAC results reported by Zakka et al. (2025) and Tao et al.
(2025). We report PPO baselines at 50M environment steps, and at the larger training horizon used
in the original papers (Zakka et al., 2025). Results taken from Zakka et al. (2025) are denoted as
“PPO/SAC (Brax)”. To ensure that PPO is not undertuned for the 50m step regime we re-tuned
the hyperparameters of the implementation provided by Lu et al. (2022). SAC results are reported
at 5m steps as this amounts to similar total runtime as the 200m PPO results (compare results in
Zakka et al. (2025). Naively running SAC at a larger sample budget and wall-clock efficiency
can lead to instability, as Seo et al. (2025) demonstrates. Furthermore, we include FastTD3 (Seo
et al., 2025) on DMC locomotion tasks, trained under two memory budgets: the default replay
buffer (10,485,760 transitions) and a constrained buffer similar in size to on-policy methods (32,768
transitions) to control for the the memory and performance trade-off. Finally, we compare against
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
Environment steps
×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized returns
DMC Comparison
REPPO
PPO
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Environment steps
×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Success Rate
Maniskill Comparison
REPPO
PPO
Figure 6: Aggregate sample efficiency curves for the benchmark environments. Settings are identical
to those in Figure 5. REPPO achieves higher performance at a faster rate in both benchmarks.
Robust Policy Optimization (RPO) (Rahman & Xue, 2023) and Discovered Policy Optimization
(DPO) (Lu et al., 2022). However, even with some hyperparameter tuning, we were unable to
achieve a strong performance improvement beyond the PPO baseline with these approaches.
For REPPO, we report results aggregated over 20 seeds. We run 20 seeds for PPO and 5 for
FastTD33, reporting aggregate scores with 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals (Agarwal et al.,
2021). To aggregate scores, mujoco playground returns are normalized by the maximum achieved
by any algorithm. For ManiSkill we report raw success rates, which are comparable across tasks.
Final Performance and Sample Efficiency We first investigate the performance of policies trained
using REPPO. We report aggregate performance at the end of training on both benchmarks in Fig-
ure 5. For both benchmarks, we also provide the corresponding training curves in Figure 6.
The aggregate results shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6 indicate that our proposed method achieves
statistically significant performance improvements over PPO, as well as similar performance to
FastTD3 despite REPPO being fully on-policy. Although these results are most pronounced in
locomotion tasks, ManiSkill manipulation results show significant performance benefits over PPO
in terms of outlier-robust metrics (Chan et al., 2020a; Agarwal et al., 2021).
We find that PPO struggles on high-dimensional tasks such as HumanoidRun. Moreover, despite its
approximate trust-region updates, PPO suffers from performance drops and unstable training. This
erratic behavior closely mirrors the score-based policy gradient instability shown in Figure 3a. In
contrast, REPPO exhibits more stable improvements and lower variance across seeds.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Seconds
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized returns
DMC Comparison
REPPO
PPO
PPO (Brax, 200M)
SAC (Brax, 5M)
Figure 7:
Wall-clock time comparison of
REPPO against PPO and SAC implementa-
tions in JAX. REPPO matches other algo-
rithms’ speed but achieves higher return.
Wall-clock Time
Wall-clock time is an important
metric, as it reflects the practical utility of an algo-
rithm: faster training enables more efficient hyperpa-
rameter search and experimentation. However, mea-
suring wall-clock time is nuanced, as results heavily
depend on implementation details and are difficult
to reproduce. We discuss these challenges across
different frameworks in Appendix B. In Figure 7,
we compare the wall-clock performance of our ap-
proach against PPO and SAC in JAX. Other base-
lines lack JIT-compilable implementations, making
direct comparisons less meaningful.
The computational cost per update is higher for
REPPO than for PPO due to larger default networks
and gradient propagation through the critic–actor
chain.
Nevertheless, both algorithms converge
on most tasks in roughly 600–800 seconds, with
REPPO achieving about 33% higher normalized returns. This shows that the sample efficiency
3We use fewer seeds for FastTD3 as we are unable to replicate the speed claimed in the paper. This is due
pytorch specific issues discussed in Appendix B, and because we use smaller GPUs for our experiments.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
Environment steps
×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
% of runs with return > 0.9
DMC Comparison (Reliable success)
REPPO
PPO
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Environment steps
×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
% of runs with success > 0.9
Maniskill Comparison (Reliable success)
REPPO
PPO
Figure 8: Fraction of runs that achieve reliable performance as measured by our metric for policy
stability and reliability. REPPO’s immediately starts achieving high performance in some runs and
the number gradually increases indicating stable learning. PPO struggles to achieve high perfor-
mance initially and to maintain high performance throughout training.
of pathwise gradients can offset their higher per-update cost, yielding improved wall-clock effi-
ciency compared to score-based PPO. In addition, we find that jax-based SAC, which is tuned to
trade sample for computational efficiency, slightly outperforms PPO, but does not match REPPO in
performance. We note that other, modern SAC implementations (Nauman et al., 2024b; Lee et al.,
2025a;b), are able to achieve better performance, but at the cost of computational efficiency.
Reliable Policy Success
We further investigate the stability of policy improvements using score-
based and pathwise policy gradients. Our guiding principle is that such updates should not cause
large drops in performance. To capture this, we adopt the “reliable success” metric, as proposed
in Chan et al. (2020b). We define an algorithm as reliably performant if, once its performance
exceeds a fixed threshold τ, it never drops below this threshold thereafter. At each timestep, we
track the number of runs that satisfy this criterion. This metric reflects the practical requirement that
a deployed algorithm should not suddenly degrade simply due to continued training. We report the
percentage of reliably successful runs for both REPPO and PPO in Figure 8.
On both DMC and ManiSkill benchmarks, REPPO achieves reliable performance improvements
quickly. By the end of training, about four out of five runs have reached the threshold of τ = 0.9,
whereas PPO achieves roughly 40 percentage points fewer reliably performant runs. We also find
notable differences in sample efficiency: PPO requires 5–10 million interactions before most envs
become reliably performant. Overall, these results show that, despite relying on a biased value
model, pathwise policy gradients enable stable long-term improvement.
5
CONCLUSION AND AVENUES FOR FUTURE WORK
In this paper we present REPPO, a highly performant yet efficient on-policy algorithm that leverages
trained state-action value functions and pathwise policy gradients. By balancing entropic exploration
and KL-constraints, and incorporating recent advances in neural network value function learning,
REPPO is able to learn a high-quality approximation sufficient for reliable gradient estimation. As a
result, the algorithm outperforms PPO on two GPU-parallelized benchmarks in terms of final return,
sample efficiency and reliability while being on par in terms of wall-clock time. In addition, the
algorithm does not require storing large amount of data making it competitive with recent advances
in off-policy RL while requiring orders of magnitude lower amounts of memory.
As our method opens a new area for algorithmic development, it leaves open many exciting avenues
for future work. As Seo et al. (2025) shows, using replay buffers can be beneficial to stabilize
learning as well. This raises the question if our Q learning objective can be expanded to use both on-
and off-policy data to maximize performance while minimizing memory requirements. Furthermore,
the wide literature on improvements on PPO, such as learned objectives (Lu et al., 2022) can be
incorporated into REPPO. We also observe that removing the importance sampling step in PPO has
a crucial impact on performance, which suggests further research on the trade-off between efficiency
and stability in on-policy gradient estimation is needed. Finally, better architectures such as Nauman
et al. (2024b), Lee et al. (2025a), Otto et al. (2021) might be transferable to our algorithm and the rich
literature on architectural improvements in off-policy RL can be tested in on-policy value learning.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CV acknowledges funding through the Ontario Graduate Scholarship.
AMF acknowledges the
support of NSERC through the Discovery Grant program [2021-03701], Polytechnique Montr´eal’s
PIED program, and IVADO IAR3 grant. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in
part, by the Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies spon-
soring the Vector Institute. EE and MH’s research was partially supported by the DARPA Triage
Challenge under award HR00112420305. Any opinions, findings, and conclusion or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of
DARPA or the US government.
REFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Rosie Zhao, Joseph Modayil, Adam White, and Marlos C. Machado. Loss of plas-
ticity in continual deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Lifelong
Learning Agents, 2023.
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Rudolf Lioutikov, Jan R Peters, Nuno Lau, Luis Pualo Reis, and Gerhard
Neumann. Model-based relative entropy stochastic search. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2015.
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Mar-
tin Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G. Bellemare.
Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2021.
Matthew Aitchison and Penny Sweetser. DNA: Proximal policy optimization with a dual network
architecture. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Riad Akrour, Joni Pajarinen, Jan Peters, and Gerhard Neumann. Projections for approximate policy
iteration algorithms. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. In ArXiv, volume
abs/1607.06450, 2016.
Leemon Baird.
Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation.
In
Machine Learning. Springer, 1995.
Philip J. Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-
ing with offline data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and R´emi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
//github.com/jax-ml/jax.
Onur Celik, Zechu Li, Denis Blessing, Ge Li, Daniel Palenicek, Jan Peters, Georgia Chalvatzaki,
and Gerhard Neumann. DIME: Diffusion-based maximum entropy reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Stephanie Chan, Sam Fishman, John Canny, Anoop Korattikara, and Sergio Guadarrama. Mea-
suring the reliability of reinforcement learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Stephanie CY Chan, Samuel Fishman, John Canny, Anoop Korattikara, and Sergio Guadarrama.
Measuring the reliability of reinforcement learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake,
and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research, 2024.
Petros Christodoulou. Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07207,
2019.
Karl W Cobbe, Jacob Hilton, Oleg Klimov, and John Schulman. Phasic policy gradient. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Brett Daley and Christopher Amato. Reconciling λ-returns with experience replay. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G. Bellemare, and
Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taiga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex Ir-
pan, Sergey Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agarwal.
Stop regressing: Training value functions via classification for scalable deep RL. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
William Fedus, Prajit Ramachandran, Rishabh Agarwal, Yoshua Bengio, Hugo Larochelle, Mark
Rowland, and Will Dabney. Revisiting fundamentals of experience replay. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
actor-critic methods. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, Pierluca D’Oro, Amy Zhang, Yuandong Tian, and Michael Rabbat.
Towards
general-purpose model-free reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Matteo Gallici, Mattie Fellows, Benjamin Ellis, Bartomeu Pou, Ivan Masmitja, Jakob Nicolaus
Foerster, and Mario Martin. Simplifying deep temporal difference learning. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Ignat Georgiev, Krishnan Srinivasan, Jie Xu, Eric Heiden, and Animesh Garg. Adaptive horizon
actor-critic for policy learningin contact-rich differentiable simulation. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.
Evan Greensmith, Peter L. Bartlett, and Jonathan Baxter. Variance reduction techniques for gradient
estimates in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5, 2004.
Jakub Grudzien, Christian A Schroeder De Witt, and Jakob Foerster. Mirror learning: A unifying
framework of policy optimisation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2022.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algo-
rithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
crete world models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
2021.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. TD-MPC2: Scalable, robust world models for con-
tinuous control. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
Marcel Hussing, Claas Voelcker, Igor Gilitschenski, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Eric Eaton.
Dissecting deep RL with high update ratios: Combatting value divergence. In Reinforcement
Learning Conference, 2024.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. A closer look at deep policy gradients. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Ehsan Imani and Martha White. Improving regression performance with distributional losses. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Max Jaderberg, Volodymyr Mnih, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Tom Schaul, Joel Z. Leibo, David
Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Reinforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Scott Jordan, Yash Chandak, Daniel Cohen, Mengxue Zhang, and Philip Thomas. Evaluating the
performance of reinforcement learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, 2020.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2002.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems,
2001.
Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias M¨uller, Vladlen Koltun, and
Davide Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
620(7976):982–987, 2023.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Dibya Ghosh, and Sergey Levine. Implicit under-parameterization
inhibits data-efficient deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2021.
Hojoon Lee, Dongyoon Hwang, Donghu Kim, Hyunseung Kim, Jun Jet Tai, Kaushik Subramanian,
Peter R. Wurman, Jaegul Choo, Peter Stone, and Takuma Seno. Simba: Simplicity bias for scaling
up parameters in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025a.
Hojoon Lee, Youngdo Lee, Takuma Seno, Donghu Kim, Peter Stone, and Jaegul Choo. Hyperspher-
ical normalization for scalable deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025b.
Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and review.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00909, 2018.
Jiajin Li, Baoxiang Wang, and Shengyu Zhang. Policy optimization with second-order advantage
information. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Zechu Li, Tao Chen, Zhang-Wei Hong, Anurag Ajay, and Pulkit Agrawal.
Parallel q-learning:
Scaling off-policy reinforcement learning under massively parallel simulation. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
Chris Lu, Jakub Kuba, Alistair Letcher, Luke Metz, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and Jakob Foerster.
Discovered policy optimisation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2023.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Khimya Khetarpal, Hado Van Hasselt, Razvan Pascanu, James Martens,
and Will Dabney. Disentangling the causes of plasticity loss in neural networks. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, 2024.
Haitong Ma, Tianyi Chen, Kai Wang, Na Li, and Bo Dai. Efficient online reinforcement learning
for diffusion policy. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relax-
ation of discrete random variables. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Mayank Mittal, Pascal Roth, James Tigue, Antoine Richard, Octi Zhang, Peter Du, Antonio Serrano-
Mu˜noz, Xinjie Yao, Ren´e Zurbr¨ugg, Nikita Rudin, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Milad Rakhsha, Alain
Denzler, Eric Heiden, Ales Borovicka, Ossama Ahmed, Iretiayo Akinola, Abrar Anwar, Mark T.
Carlson, Ji Yuan Feng, Animesh Garg, Renato Gasoto, Lionel Gulich, Yijie Guo, M. Gussert, Alex
Hansen, Mihir Kulkarni, Chenran Li, Wei Liu, Viktor Makoviychuk, Grzegorz Malczyk, Hammad
Mazhar, Masoud Moghani, Adithyavairavan Murali, Michael Noseworthy, Alexander Poddubny,
Nathan Ratliff, Welf Rehberg, Clemens Schwarke, Ritvik Singh, James Latham Smith, Bingjie
Tang, Ruchik Thaker, Matthew Trepte, Karl Van Wyk, Fangzhou Yu, Alex Millane, Vikram Ra-
masamy, Remo Steiner, Sangeeta Subramanian, Clemens Volk, CY Chen, Neel Jawale, Ash-
win Varghese Kuruttukulam, Michael A. Lin, Ajay Mandlekar, Karsten Patzwaldt, John Welsh,
Huihua Zhao, Fatima Anes, Jean-Francois Lafleche, Nicolas Mo¨enne-Loccoz, Soowan Park, Rob
Stepinski, Dirk Van Gelder, Chris Amevor, Jan Carius, Jumyung Chang, Anka He Chen, Pablo
de Heras Ciechomski, Gilles Daviet, Mohammad Mohajerani, Julia von Muralt, Viktor Reut-
skyy, Michael Sauter, Simon Schirm, Eric L. Shi, Pierre Terdiman, Kenny Vilella, Tobias Wid-
mer, Gordon Yeoman, Tiffany Chen, Sergey Grizan, Cathy Li, Lotus Li, Connor Smith, Rafael
Wiltz, Kostas Alexis, Yan Chang, David Chu, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Farbod Farshidian, Ankur Handa,
Spencer Huang, Marco Hutter, Yashraj Narang, Soha Pouya, Shiwei Sheng, Yuke Zhu, Miles
Macklin, Adam Moravanszky, Philipp Reist, Yunrong Guo, David Hoeller, and Gavriel State.
Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.04831, 2025.
Skander Moalla, Andrea Miele, Daniil Pyatko, Razvan Pascanu, and Caglar Gulcehre. No repre-
sentation, no trust: Connecting representation, collapse, and trust issues in PPO. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Shakir Mohamed, Mihaela Rosca, Michael Figurnov, and Andriy Mnih. Monte carlo gradient esti-
mation in machine learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(132):1–62, 2020.
Miguel Angel Zamora Mora, Momchil Peychev, Sehoon Ha, Martin Vechev, and Stelian Coros.
Pods: Policy optimization via differentiable simulation. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Ted Moskovitz, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Michael Arbel, and Michael Jordan. Tactical
optimism and pessimism for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2021.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Michal Nauman and Marek Cygan. Decoupled policy actor-critic: Bridging pessimism and risk
awareness in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, 2025.
Michal Nauman, Michał Bortkiewicz, Piotr Miło´s, Tomasz Trzcinski, Mateusz Ostaszewski, and
Marek Cygan. Overestimation, overfitting, and plasticity in actor-critic: the bitter lesson of rein-
forcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Michal Nauman, Mateusz Ostaszewski, Krzysztof Jankowski, Piotr Miło´s, and Marek Cygan. Big-
ger, regularized, optimistic: scaling for compute and sample-efficient continuous control.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Michal Nauman, Marek Cygan, Carmelo Sferrazza, Aviral Kumar, and Pieter Abbeel.
Bigger,
regularized, categorical: High-capacity value functions are efficient multi-task learners.
In
The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=zhOUfuOIzA.
Gerhard Neumann. Variational inference for policy search in changing situations. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, Erfan Seyedsalehi, Michel Ma, Clement Gehring, Aditya Ma-
hajan, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. Bridging state and history representations: Understanding self-
predictive RL.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2022.
Chris Nota and Philip S. Thomas. Is the policy gradient a gradient? In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2020.
Fabian Otto, Philipp Becker, Vien Anh Ngo, Hanna Carolin Maria Ziesche, and Gerhard Neumann.
Differentiable trust region layers for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35, 2022.
Joni Pajarinen, Hong Linh Thai, Riad Akrour, Jan Peters, and Gerhard Neumann.
Compatible
natural gradient policy search. Machine Learning, 108(8), 2019.
Daniel Palenicek, Florian Vogt, Joe Watson, Ingmar Posner, and Jan Peters. Xqc: Well-conditioned
optimization accelerates deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25174, 2025.
Matteo Papini, Giorgio Manganini, Alberto Maria Metelli, and Marcello Restelli. Policy gradient
with active importance sampling. Reinforcement Learning Journal, 2:645–675, 2024.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Natural actor-critic. In Neurocomputing, volume 71. Elsevier, 2008.
Jan Peters, Katharina M¨ulling, and Yasemin Alt¨un. Relative entropy policy search. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2010.
Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1st edition, 1994. ISBN 0471619779.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Bike Zhang, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra Malik, and Koushil Sreenath.
Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement learning. Science Robotics, 9(89):eadi9579,
2024.
Md Masudur Rahman and Yexiang Xue. Robust policy optimization in deep reinforcement learning,
2023.
Nate Rahn, Pierluca D’Oro, Harley Wiltzer, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Marc Bellemare. Policy op-
timization in a noisy neighborhood: On return landscapes in continuous control. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:30618–30640, 2023.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 91–100.
PMLR, 2022.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms, 2017.
Clemens Schwarke, Mayank Mittal, Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, and Marco Hutter. Rsl-rl: A
learning library for robotics research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10771, 2025.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R. Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bach-
man. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-
wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level atari with human-level effi-
ciency. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Younggyo Seo, Carmelo Sferrazza, Haoran Geng, Michal Nauman, Zhao-Heng Yin, and Pieter
Abbeel. Fasttd3: Simple, fast, and capable reinforcement learning for humanoid control. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.22642, 2025.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
Deterministic policy gradient algorithms.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2014.
Samuel Sokota, Ryan D’Orazio, J Zico Kolter, Nicolas Loizou, Marc Lanctot, Ioannis Mitliagkas,
Noam Brown, and Christian Kroer. A unified approach to reinforcement learning, quantal re-
sponse equilibria, and two-player zero-sum games. In Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop
NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
Sanghyun Son, Laura Yu Zheng, Ryan Sullivan, Yi-Ling Qiao, and Ming Lin. Gradient informed
proximal policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
H. Francis Song, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aidan Clark, Hubert Soyer, Jack W.
Rae, Seb Noury, Arun Ahuja, Siqi Liu, Dhruva Tirumala, Nicolas Heess, Dan Belov, Martin
Riedmiller, and Matthew M. Botvinick. V-MPO: On-Policy Maximum a Posteriori Policy Opti-
mization for Discrete and Continuous Control. In Proceedings of the International conference on
Learning Representations, 2019.
Hyung Ju Suh, Max Simchowitz, Kaiqing Zhang, and Russ Tedrake. Do differentiable simulators
give better policy gradients? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, 2022.
Richard S Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. In Machine learning,
volume 3. Springer, 1988.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. A Bradford
Book, 2nd edition, 2018.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Richard S Sutton, A Rupam Mahmood, and Martha White. An emphatic approach to the problem of
off-policy temporal-difference learning. In Journal of Machine Learning Research, volume 17.
MIT Press, 2016.
Yunhao Tang, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Bernardo ´Avila Pires, Yash Chan-
dak, R´emi Munos, Mark Rowland, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Charline Le Lan, Clare Lyle,
and others. Understanding self-predictive learning for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Stone Tao, Fanbo Xiang, Arth Shukla, Yuzhe Qin, Xander Hinrichsen, Xiaodi Yuan, Chen Bao,
Xinsong Lin, Yulin Liu, Tse kai Chan, Yuan Gao, Xuanlin Li, Tongzhou Mu, Nan Xiao, Arnav
Gurha, Viswesh Nagaswamy Rajesh, Yong Woo Choi, Yen-Ru Chen, Zhiao Huang, Roberto Ca-
landra, Rui Chen, Shan Luo, and Hao Su. Maniskill3: Gpu parallelized robotics simulation and
rendering for generalizable embodied ai. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2025.
Sebastian Thrun and Anton Schwartz. Issues in using function approximation for reinforcement
learning. In Connectionist Models Summer School, 1993.
Manan Tomar, Lior Shani, Yonathan Efroni, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Mirror descent policy
optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Hado Van Hasselt. Double q-learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2010.
Claas Voelcker, Marcel Hussing, and Eric Eaton. Can we hop in general? a discussion of benchmark
selection and design using the hopper environment. In Finding the Frame: An RLC Workshop for
Examining Conceptual Frameworks, 2024a.
Claas Voelcker, Tyler Kastner, Igor Gilitschenski, and Amir-massoud Farahmand. When does self-
prediction help? understanding auxiliary tasks in reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement Learn-
ing Conference, 2024b.
Claas Voelcker, Marcel Hussing, Eric Eaton, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Igor Gilitschenski.
MAD-TD: Model-augmented data stabilizes high update ratio RL. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Yuhui Wang, Hao He, and Xiaoyang Tan. Truly proximal policy optimization. In Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Zhengpeng Xie, Qiang Zhang, Fan Yang, Marco Hutter, and Renjing Xu. Simple policy optimiza-
tion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Jie Xu, Miles Macklin, Viktor Makoviychuk, Yashraj Narang, Animesh Garg, Fabio Ramos, and
Wojciech Matusik. Accelerated policy learning with parallel differentiable simulation. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yang Yue, Rui Lu, Bingyi Kang, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Understanding, predicting and bet-
ter resolving q-value divergence in offline-RL. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
Kevin Zakka, Baruch Tabanpour, Qiayuan Liao, Mustafa Haiderbhai, Samuel Holt, Jing Yuan Luo,
Arthur Allshire, Erik Frey, Koushil Sreenath, Lueder A. Kahrs, Carlo Sferrazza, Yuval Tassa, and
Pieter Abbeel. MuJoCo playground: An open-source framework for GPU-accelerated robot learn-
ing and sim-to-real transfer., 2025.
URL https://github.com/google-deepmind/
mujoco_playground.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2008.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
EXTENDED RELATED WORK
Stabilizing On-Policy RL
A fundamental issue with score-based approaches is their instability.
Therefore, various improvements to decrease gradient variance have been considered. Some works
have noted the difficulty of representation learning and have addressed this via decoupling the train-
ing of value and policy (Cobbe et al., 2021; Aitchison & Sweetser, 2022). Moalla et al. (2024) note
that feature learning problems can result from representation collapse, which can be mitigated using
auxiliary losses. There are also efforts to reduce the variance of gradients, e.g. by finding a policy
that minimizes the variance of the importance sampling factor (Papini et al., 2024) or modifying the
loss to ensure tighter total variational distance constraints (Xie et al., 2025).
Incorporating ground-truth gradient signal to stabilize training has also been studied, both for dy-
namical systems (Son et al., 2023) and differentiable robotics simulation (Mora et al., 2021; Xu
et al., 2022; Georgiev et al., 2024). However, access to a ground-truth gradient requires custom sim-
ulators, and in contact-rich tasks, approximate models can provide smoother gradients (Suh et al.,
2022).
Trust regions and constrained policy optimization
Other approaches have used similar KL and
trust region constraint as REPPO. Schulman et al. (2015) and Peters et al. (2010) formulate the KL
constrained policy update as a constrained optimization problem. Peters et al. (2010) shows a closed
form solution to this problem, while Schulman et al. (2015) uses a conjugate gradient scheme to
solve the relaxed optimization problem. Schulman et al. (2017) replaces the Lagrangian formulation
with a clipping heuristic. However, clipping can lead to wrong gradient estimates (Ilyas et al., 2020)
and in some scenarios the clipping objective fails to bound the policy deviation (Wang et al., 2020).
Akrour et al. (2019) propose to project the policy onto the trust-region to sidestep the difficulty
associated with clipping. We find that our approach is simpler to implement and more general, as
we do not assume direct projection is possible.
Otto et al. (2021) propose to replace the various trust-region enforcement methods such as line-
search or clipping with differentiable trust-region layers in the policy neural network architecture.
While our method is slightly more general, as we make no assumption on the form of the policy
(aside from assuming gradient propagation through the sampling process is possible), trust-region
layers could easily be combined with REPPO for appropriate policy parameterizations.
Work on GPU-parallelized On-policy RL
With the parallelization of many benchmarks on
GPUs (Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Zakka et al., 2025; Tao et al., 2025), massively-parallel on-policy
RL has become quite popular. While these environments provide simulation testbeds, algorithms
trained in such environments have shown to transfer to real-robots, allowing us to train them in
minutes rather than days (Rudin et al., 2022).
Hybridizing Off-policy and On-policy RL methods
Most closely to our work, Parallel Q Net-
works (PQN) (Gallici et al., 2024) was established by using standard discrete action-space off-policy
techniques in the MPS setting. While our work shares several important features with this method,
we find that our additional insights on KL regularization and tuning is crucial for adapting the con-
cept to continuous action spaces. We also evaluate our approach on discrete action spaces (see
Appendix C). While PQN performs slightly better, likely owing to tuned exploration techniques, we
show that our method works robustly across both discrete and continuous action spaces.
Other methods, such as Parallel Q-Learning (Li et al., 2023) and FastTD3 (Seo et al., 2025) also
attempt to use deterministic policy gradient algorithms in the MPS setting, but still remain off-policy.
This has two major drawbacks compared to our work. The methods require very large replay buffers,
which can either limit the speed if data needs to be stored in regular CPU memory, or require very
large and expensive GPUs. In addition, the off-policy nature of these methods requires stabilizing
techniques such as clipped double Q learning, which has been shown to prevent exploration.
KL-based RL
Finally, other works also build on top of the relative entropy policy search (Peters
et al., 2010). Maximum A Posteriori Policy Optimization (MPO) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) and
Variational MPO (Song et al., 2019) both leverage SAC style maximum entropy objectives and use
KL constraints to prevent policy divergence. However, both methods use off-policy data together
with importance sampling, which we forgo, do not tune the KL and entropy parameters, and crucially
do not make use of the deterministic policy gradient.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Going beyond relative entropy, the KL-based constraint formulation has been generalized to include
the class of mirror descent algorithms (Grudzien et al., 2022; Tomar et al., 2022). In addition,
Lu et al. (2022) meta-learns a constraint to automatically discover novel RL algorithms. These
advancements are largely orthogonal to our work and can be incorporated into REPPO in the future.
Instability in Off-policy RL
Our method furthermore adapts many design decisions from recent
off-policy literature. Among these are layer normalizations, which have been studied by Nauman
et al. (2024a); Hussing et al. (2024); Nauman et al. (2024b); Gallici et al. (2024), auxiliary tasks
(Jaderberg et al., 2017; Schwarzer et al., 2021; 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Voelcker et al., 2024b; Ni
et al., 2024), and HL-Gauss (Farebrother et al., 2024), variants of which have been used by Hafner
et al. (2021); Hansen et al. (2024); Voelcker et al. (2025). Beyond these, there are several other
works which investigate architectures for stable off-policy value learning, such as Nauman et al.
(2024b); Lee et al. (2025a;b). A similar method to our KL regularization tuning objective has been
used by (Nauman & Cygan, 2025) to build an exploratory optimistic actor. While the technique
is very similar, we employ it in the context of the trust-region update, and show the importance of
jointly tuning the entropy and KL parameters. Finally, there are several papers which investigate the
impact of continual learning in off-policy reinforcement learning, including issues such as out-of-
distribution misgeneralization (Voelcker et al., 2025), plasticity loss (Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro
et al., 2023; Lyle et al., 2023; Abbas et al., 2023). Since many of these works focus specifically
on improving issues inherent in the off-policy setting, we did not evaluate all of these changes in
REPPO. However, rigorously evaluating what network architectures and stabilization methods can
help to further improve the online regime is an exciting avenue for future work.
B
WALLCLOCK MEASUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Measuring wall-clock time has become a popular way of highlighting the practical utility of an
algorithm as it allows us to quickly deploy new models and iterate on ideas. Rigorous wall-clock
time measurement is a difficult topic, as many factors impact the wall-clock time of an algorithm.
We chose to not compare the jax and torch versions head-to-head as we found significant runtime
differences on different hardware, and the different compilation philosophies lead to different ben-
efits and drawbacks. For example, jax’ full jit-compilation trades a much larger initial overhead for
significantly faster execution, which can amortize itself depending on the number of timesteps taken.
This is the reason why we do not include FastTD3 in Figure 7, as only a PyTorch implementation of
the algorithm exists. FastTD3 and REPPO use similar algorithms and hyperparameters, therefore,
barring complexities like those discussed below, we expect them to perform at similar speeds.
More importantly, torch’s compilation libraries are built to accelerate standard supervised and gen-
erative workflows, but do not support RL primitives equally well. As the CPU needs to load ker-
nels during training which the GPU then executes, the CPU plays a much larger role in the speed
measurements of the torch-based variant of REPPO. Especially the tanh-squashed log probability
computation and the frequent resampling from the action space cannot be offloaded into an efficient
kernel without providing one manually, which we have not done. This is likely due to the fact that
torch keeps its random seed on the CPU. This is not a concern for jax, due to the fact that all kernels
are statically compiled when the program is first executed, and random seeds are handled explicitly
as part of the program state. Therefore, the CPU is under much lower load.
Instead of raw wall-clock time measurements, which can vary massively across framework and
hardware, we recommend that the community treat the question of wall-clock time more carefully.
While the actual time for an experiment can be of massive importance from a practical point of
view, the advantages and limitations of current frameworks can obscure exciting directions for future
work. For example REPPO is highly competitive with PPO when implemented in jax, but struggles
somewhat in torch due to framework specific design choices.
C
DISCRETE REPPO (D-REPPO)
One of the major advantages of PPO in the zoo of RL algorithms is the fact that it can be used in
both continuous and discrete action settings. However, as we build on the DDPG/TD3/SAC line of
work, the exposition of our algorithm has focused on the continuous setting alone.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Nonetheless, it is easy to adapt our approach to the discrete action setting as well. Following the
proposal of Christodoulou (2019), we can circumvent the chained critic-actor gradient and compute
the value of the current policy, the entropy, and the KL bound in closed form
LD−REPPO
π,≤KL
(θ|B) = −1
|B|
|B|
X
i=1
|A|
X
j=1
πθ(aj|xi) (Q(xi, aj) + eα log πθ(aj|xi))
(14)
LD−REPPO
π,>KL
(θ|B) = −1
|B|
|B|
X
i=1
eβ
|A|
X
j=1
πθ′(aj|xi) log πθ′(aj|xi)
πθ(aj|xi)
(15)
LD−REPPO
π
(θ|B) =
(
LD−REPPO
π,≤KL
(θ|B),
if Pk
j=1 log πθ′(aj|xi)
πθ(aj|xi) < εKL
LD−REPPO
π,>KL
(θ|B),
otherwise.
(16)
This variant of our algorithm still directly differentiates the full Q function objective, so can still
be seen as a pathwise implementation. But computing the expectation in closed form circumvents
the necessity to use a biased estimator for discrete sampling, such as the Gumbel-Softmax trick
(Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2024).
To investigate the benefits of our approach in the discrete action setting, we compare it against PQN
(Gallici et al., 2024) and PPO. The main benefit of our approach over PQN is that it is a) a general
algorithm that unifies both discrete and continuous action spaces, due to the underlying actor critic
architecture, and b) that the principled entropy and KL objectives stabilize updates and encourages
continuing exploration without an epsilon greedy exploration strategy.
We find that our algorithm is able to perform roughly on-par with PQN in the Atari-10 suite of games
(cf. Table 1 and Figure 9) with only minor changes to the architecture to adapt to the Atari games
benchmark. Notably, suitable settings for the KL and entropy target remain consistent even for the
discrete action setting. We only find that the value of λ = 0.65 that is also recommended by Gallici
et al. (2024) is superior to our default value of 0.95, likely due to the higher variance of the return
in the atari games. While the high variance across Atari games makes drawing a clear conclusion
difficult, we find that PQN seems to achieve slightly better performance. We find that this is most
likely due to the fact that the algorithm adds explicit exploration noise, while we rely on the entropy
and conservative KL terms to pace policy improvement.
Table 1: Aggregated Human-Normalized Atari-10 scores with 95% confidence intervals.
Algorithm
Mean [CI]
Median [CI]
IQM [CI]
REPPO
2.98 [2.64, 3.33]
1.68 [1.48, 1.82]
1.64 [1.54, 1.74]
PQN
3.35 [3.00, 3.76]
1.58 [1.48, 1.71]
1.64 [1.58, 1.71]
D
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND HYPERPARAMETERS
In the following, we present implementation details on experiments, as well as a hyperparameter
overview.
D.1
TOY EXAMPLE
To obtain the gradient descent comparison in Subsection 2.2 we used the 6-hump camel function, a
standard benchmark in optimization. As our goal was not to show the difficulties of learning with
multiple optima, which affect any gradient-based optimization procedure, but rather smoothness of
convergence, we initialized all runs close to the global minimum. The surrogate functions were
small three layer, 16 unit MLPs. To obtain a strong and a weak version, we used differing numbers
of samples, visualized in Figure 10. Every algorithm was trained with five samples from the policy
at every iteration. Finally, we tested several learning rates. We chose a learning rate which allows the
ground-truth pathwise gradient to learn reliably. If a smaller gradient step size is chose, the Monte-
Carlo estimator converges more reliably, at the cost of significant additional computation. We also
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
500
1000
1500
Amidar-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
BattleZone-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bowling-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
−20
−10
0
10
20
DoubleDunk-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frostbite-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
KungFuMaster-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
NameThisGame-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
Phoenix-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
10000
20000
30000
Qbert-v5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×108
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Riverraid-v5
Timesteps
Return (Normalized)
Algorithms
REPPO
PQN
Figure 9: Per-environment results on the Atari-10 suite
tested subtracting a running average mean as a control variate from the Monte-Carlo estimate. While
this reduced variance significantly, it was still very easy to destabilize the algorithm by choosing a
larger step size or less data samples.
In total, our experiments further highlight a well known fact in gradient-based optimization: while a
MC-based gradient algorithm can be tuned for strong performance, it is often extremely dependent
on finding a very good set of hyperparameters. In contrast, pathwise estimators seem to work much
more reliably across a wider range of hyperparameters, which corroborates our insights on REPPO
hyperparameters robustly transfering across environemnts and benchmark suites.
D.2
HL-GAUSS EQUATIONS
Given a regression target y and a function approximation f(x), HL-Gauss transforms the regression
problem into a cross-entropy minimization. The regression target is reparameterized into a histogram
approximation hist of N(y, σ), with a fixed σ chosen heuristically. The number of histogram bins
h and minimum and maximum values are hyperparameters. Let hist(y)i be the probability value of
the histogram at the i-th bucket. The function approximation has an h-dimensional output vector of
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Figure 10: Samples used to train the surrogate function. On the left, we visualize the 32 sample
dataset to train the weak surrogate function, in the middle the 1024 datapoints to train the strong,
and on the right the full objective function.
logits. Then the loss function is
HL(f(x), y) =
h
X
i=1
hist(y)i · log
exp f(x)i
Ph
j=1 exp f(x)j
.
The continuous prediction can be recovered by evaluating
ˆy = E[hist(f(x))] = ⟨hist(f(x)), vec(min, max, h)⟩,
where vec(min, max, h) is a vector with the center values of each bin ranging from min to max.
D.3
AUXILIARY TASK SETUP
A simple yet impactful auxiliary task is latent self prediction (Schwarzer et al., 2021; Voelcker et al.,
2024b; Fujimoto et al., 2024). In its simplest form, latent self-prediction is computed by separating
the critic into an encoder ϕ : X ×A →Z and a prediction head fc : Z →R. The full critic can then
be computed as Q(x, a) = fc(ϕ(x, a)). A self-predictive auxiliary loss adds a forward predictive
model fp : Z →Z and trains the encoder and forward model jointly to minimize
Laux(xt, at, xt+1, at+1) = |fp(ϕ(xt, at)) −ϕ(xt+1, at+1)|2 .
(17)
As our whole training is on-policy, we do not separate our encoder into a state-dependent and action
dependent part as many prior off-policy works have done. Instead we compute the targets on-policy
with the behavioral policy and minimize the auxiliary loss jointly with the critic loss.
Overall, the impact of the auxiliary task is the most varied across different environments. In some, it
is crucial for learning, while having a detrimental effect in others. We conjecture that the additional
learning objective helps retain information in the critic if the reward signal is not informative. In
cases where the reward signal is sufficient and the policy gradient direction is easy to estimate,
additional training objectives might hurt performance. We encourage practitioners to investigate
whether their specific application domain and task benefits from the auxiliary loss.
D.4
REPPO MAIN EXPERIMENTS
In addition to the details laid out in the main paper, we briefly introduce the architecture and addi-
tional design decisions, as well as default hyperparameter settings.
The architecture for both critic encoder and heads, as well as the actor, consists of several nor-
malized linear layer blocks. As the activation function, we use silu/swift. As the optimizer, we
use Adam. We experimented with weight decay and learning rate schedules, but found them to be
harmful to performance. Hyperparameters are summarized in Table 2. We tune the discount factor
γ and the minimum and maximum values for the HL-Gauss representation automatically for each
environment, similar to previous work (Hansen et al., 2024). This makes the hyperparameters, to-
gether with the algorithm description, and the source code, a complete algorithm specification in
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Environment
total time steps
50, 000, 000
n envs
1024
n steps
128
KLtar
0.1
Optimization
n epochs
8
n mini batches
64
batch size
n envs × n steps
n mini batches = 2048
lr
3e −4
maximum grad norm
0.5
Problem Discount
γ
1 −
10
max env steps
λ
0.95
Critic Architecture
critic hidden dim
512
vmin
1
1−γ min r
vmax
1
1−γ max r
num HL-Gauss bins
151
num critic encoder layers
2
num critic head layers
2
num critic pred layers
2
Actor Architecture
actor hidden dim
512
num actor layers
3
RL Loss
β start
0.01
εKL
0.1
α start
0.01
εH
0.5 × dimA
aux loss mult
1.0
Table 2: Default REPPO hyperparameters
the sense of Jordan et al. (2020), as we only vary hyperparameters across environments following
simple equations on clear, domain sepcific hyperparameters such as the size of the action space and
the length of the experiment.
For all environments, we use observation normalization statistics computed as a simple running
average of mean and standard deviation. We found this to be important for performance, similar
as in other on policy algorithms. Since we do not hold data in a replay buffer, we do not need to
account for environment normalization in a specialized manner, and can simply use an environment
wrapper.
For more exact details on the architecture we refer to interested readers to the codebase.
E
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
In the following, we provide additional results and further clarification on existing experiments in
Section 4.
E.1
DESIGN ABLATIONS
We run ablation experiments investigating the impact of the design components used in REPPO.
In these experiments, we remove the cross-entropy loss via HL-Gauss, layer normalization, the
auxiliary self-predictive loss, or the KL regularization of the policy updates. To understand the
importance of each component for on-policy learning we conduct these ablations for two scales of
batch sizes - the default 131, 072 on-policy transitions, as well as the smaller batch size of 32, 768.
As shown in Figure 11, our results indicate that both the KL regularization of the policy updates and
the categorical Q-learning via HL-Gauss are necessary to achieve strong performance independent
of the size of the on-policy data used to update our model. We find that the KL divergence is
the only component that, when removed, leads to a decrease in performance below the levels of
PPO, which clarifies the central importance of relative entropy regularization for REPPO. Removing
normalization has minor negative effects on performance which become worse at smaller buffer
sizes. This is consistent with the literature on layer normalization in RL. Similarly, the auxiliary
self-predictive loss has a more clearly negative impact on performance when the batch size becomes
smaller. We note that auxiliary loss has an inconsistent impact on the training generally, where it is
strongly beneficial in some environments, but harmful in others.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.6
0.7
0.8
REPPO, no KL clip
REPPO, reverse KL
REPPO (no KL)
REPPO (no HL-Gauss)
REPPO (no normalization)
REPPO (no aux loss)
REPPO
Mean
0.60
0.75
0.90
Median
0.60
0.75
0.90
IQM
Normalized returns
(a) Large dataset size ablation (128 × 1024).
0.60
0.75
REPPO (32k buf., no KL)
REPPO (32k buf., no HL-Gauss)
REPPO (32k buf., no normalization)
REPPO (32k buf., no aux loss)
REPPO (32k buf.)
REPPO
Mean
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Median
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
IQM
Normalized returns
(b) Small dataset size ablation (32 × 1024).
Figure 11: Ablation on components and data size on the DMC benchmark. Both values are signifi-
cantly smaller than the replay buffer sizes used in standard off-policy RL algorithms like SAC and
FastTD3. The HL-Gauss loss and KL regularization provide a clear benefit at both data scales. The
normalization and auxiliary loss become more important when less data is available, highlighting
that some stability problems can also be overcome with scaling data.
E.2
MEMORY DEMANDS AND DATA SCALING
Recent advances in off-policy algorithms have shown great performance when large buffer sizes are
available (Seo et al., 2025). When dealing with complex observations such as images, on-policy
algorithms which do not require storing past data have a large advantage. In terms of data storage
requirements, our algorithm is comparable with PPO, yet it remains to answer how well REPPO
compares to algorithms that are allowed to store a large amount of data. For this, we compare
against the recent FastTD3 (Seo et al., 2025) which also uses GPU-parallelized environments but
operates off-policy. We compare REPPO against the original FastTD3 and we also re-run FastTD3
with access to a significantly smaller buffer equivalent to the REPPO buffer. We report the results in
Figure 12b.
The results demonstrate that REPPO is on par or better in terms of performance on mean and IQM
with the FastTD3 approach. This is despite the fact that REPPO uses a buffer that is two to three
orders of magnitude smaller. When decreasing the buffer size of FastTD3, the algorithm’s perfor-
mance drops by a large margin while REPPO is barely affected by a smaller buffer. We find that
FastTD3 with a smaller buffer can retain performance on lower dimensional, easier tasks but suffers
on harder tasks that may be of greater interest in practice. In summary, REPPO is competetive with
recent advances in off-policy learning with significantly lower memory and storage requirements.
These results raise the question whether positive scaling with replay buffer size is a general feature
of on-policy algorithms. In our default configuration, REPPO uses long rollouts and a high number
of parallel environments, as well as a large number of policy and value function update steps. PPO
on the other hand is often implemented with smaller dataset sizes. We therefore set up REPPO and
PPO training runs across 4 datasets, varying the rollout length. To keep the total number of gradient
steps and the minibatch size the same, we reduced the number of minibatches proportionally to the
batch size. The settings are summarized in Figure 12a. Note that in the large settings, the data
becomes more off-policy. Both PPO and REPPO have explicit ways to deal with this, clipping and
the KL minimization term respectively, but the clipping term in PPO is only a heuristic to prevent
large importance sampling ratios.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Num envs
Num steps
Num minibatches
Epochs
Updates per batch
130k buffer
1024
128
64
8
512
65k buffer
1024
32
16
8
128
32k buffer
1024
8
4
8
32
16k buffer
256
8
1
8
8
(a) Dataset configurations for the data scaling experiment.
0.64
0.72
0.80
FastTD3 (32k buf.)
REPPO (65k buf.)
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
REPPO (130k buf.)
Mean
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Median
0.7
0.8
0.9
IQM
Normalized returns
(b) Comparison of aggregate performance between REPPO and FastTD3. REPPO is competitive with the large
buffer FastTD3 version and outperforms FastTD3 when memory is limited.
0.45
0.60
0.75
PPO (16k buf.)
PPO (32k buf.)
PPO (65k buf.)
PPO (130k buf.)
REPPO (16k buf.)
REPPO (32k buf.)
REPPO (65k buf.)
REPPO (130k buf.)
Mean
0.4
0.6
0.8
Median
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
IQM
Normalized returns
(c) Aggregated performance of REPPO and PPO under different batch dataset sizes. The mean performance
of REPPO drops monotonically with decreasing batch size, while PPO shows its highest performance with a
medium and small dataset size.
Figure 12: Experiment to compare the impact of batch datset size on different on-policy algorithms.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
×108
0
10
20
30
40
Isaac-Velocity-Flat-H1-v0
0
1
2
×108
0
10
20
30
Isaac-Velocity-Rough-H1-v0
0
1
2
×108
0
10
20
30
40
Isaac-Velocity-Flat-G1-v0
0
1
2
×108
0
10
20
30
40
50
Isaac-Velocity-Rough-G1-v0
Timesteps
Return
Algorithms
REPPO (rsl rl)
PPO (rsl rl)
FastTD3
Figure 13: Result overview of REPPO on the IsaacLab locomotion tasks
Comparing the performance of both approaches (see Figure 12c), we observe a clear pattern. The
mean performance of REPPO drops steeply with decreasing dataset size. PPO on the other hand
does best in the medium and small dataset regimes. This highlights the different mechanisms on
which both algorithms operate. Larger datasets allow the trained Q function to generalize better,
similar to the insight presented in Figure 3a. On the other hand, for PPO the dataset size needs to be
large enough to allow for stable gradient estimation, but not so large that too many gradient update
steps are necessary. This is because clipping can prevent further learning, and many update steps
can exacerbate varaince issues with importance sampling.
Note that at some point, REPPO will likely also stop improving with larger datasets and more
gradient update steps. We see that the performance differences between the medium and the large
dataset at not as strong as with smaller datasets. REPPO cannot continue to learn on fixed data
forever, by design, as the KL divergence between two consecutive policies is constrained. However,
we can hypothesize based on the empirical evidence that REPPO is able to scale more gracefully
with large amounts of data.
Overall, we can conclude that REPPO scales favorably with larger data buffers, similar to SAC or
FastTD3, but is not strongly reliant on it.
E.3
ISAACLAB RESULTS
To provide additional value to the robotics community, who often favor specific implementations
and APIs for reinforcement learning algorithms, we provide a reimplementation of REPPO in RSL-
RL Schwarke et al. (2025). We ran this implementation of REPPO and compare the results on the
humanoid locomotion environments in the Isaaclab suite Mittal et al. (2025). Results are presented
in Figure 13. The FastTD3 results provided by Seo et al. (2025) are not all ran for the full 250
million timesteps.
For IsaacLab, we found that the KL constraint needs to be set more tightly to 0.01, which is the
same value used for PPO.
E.4
PER ENVIRONMENT SAMPLE EFFICIENCY CURVES
Finally, we provide sample efficiency curves per environment in Figure 14, Figure 15, and Figure 16.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
PickSingleYCB-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
PegInsertionSide-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
UnitreeG1TransportBox-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
UnitreeG1PlaceAppleInBowl-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
LiftPegUpright-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
PokeCube-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
PullCube-v1
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
RollBall-v1
Timesteps
Success Rate
Algorithms
PPO
REPPO
Figure 14: Per-environment results on the ManiSkill suite
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
AcrobotSwingup
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
AcrobotSwingupSparse
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
BallInCup
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
CartpoleBalance
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
CartpoleBalanceSparse
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
CartpoleSwingup
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
CartpoleSwingupSparse
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
CheetahRun
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
FingerSpin
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
FingerTurnEasy
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
FingerTurnHard
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
FishSwim
Timesteps
Return
Algorithms
REPPO
PPO
PPO (Brax)
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
Figure 15: Per-environment results on the mujoco playground DMC suite
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
HopperHop
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
HopperStand
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
PendulumSwingup
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
ReacherEasy
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
ReacherHard
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
WalkerRun
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
WalkerWalk
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
WalkerStand
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
HumanoidStand
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
HumanoidWalk
0
1
2
3
4
5
×107
0
250
500
750
1000
HumanoidRun
Timesteps
Return
Algorithms
PPO
PPO (Brax)
FastTD3 (10,000k buf.)
REPPO
Figure 16: Per-environment results on the mujoco playground DMC suite
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
F
PSEUDOCODE
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for Relative Entropy Pathwise Policy Optimization
Input: Environment E, actor network πθ, critic network Qϕ, hyperparameters
Output: Trained policy πθ
// Initialize networks
Actor πθ, behavior policy πθ′ with θ′ = θ, critic Qϕ with encoder fϕ, entropy and KL
temperature α and β
for iteration = 1 to Niterations do
// Step 1:
Collect rollout with behavior policy
for step = 1 to Nsteps do
// Apply exploration noise scaling
Sample action at ∼πθ′(·|xt)
Execute at in environment, observe (xt+1, rt, dt)
Compute approximate Vt+1 ←Qϕ(xt+1, at+1) with at+1 ∼πθ′(·|xt+1)
Compute ψt ←fϕ(xt+1, at+1)
// Maximum entropy augmented reward, see Subsection 3.1
˜rt ←rt −α log πθ(at+1|xt+1)
Store transition (xt, at, ˜rt, xt+1, dt, Vt+1, ψt)
end
// Step 2:
Compute TD-λ targets, see Subsection 3.1
for t = T −1 down to 0 do
Gλ
t ←˜rt + γ[(1 −dt)(λGλ
t+1 + (1 −λ)Vt+1)]
end
// Step 3:
Update networks for multiple epochs
for epoch = 1 to Nepochs do
Shuffle data and create mini-batches
for each mini-batch b = {(x, a, Gλ, ψ)i}B
i=1 do
// Categorical critic update, see Subsection 3.3
LQ ←1
B
P CrossEntropy(Qϕ(xi, ai), Cat(Gλ
i ))
// Auxiliary task, see Subsection 3.3
Laux ←1
B
P ||fϕ(xi, ai) −ψi||2]
Update critic: ϕ ←ϕ −αQ∇ϕ(LQ + βLaux)
// Actor update with entropy and KL regularization, see
Subsection 3.1 and Subsection 3.2
Sample action a′
i ∼πθ(·|xi)
Sample k actions ¯ai ∼πθ′(·|xi)
Compute KL divergence: DKL(xi) ←Pk
j=1 log πθ′(¯aj|xi)
πθ(¯aj|xi)
Policy loss: Lπ ←1
B
P Qϕ(xi, a′
i) −eα log πθ(a′
i|xi) −eβDKL(xi)
(Alternatively, compute clipped objective)
Update actor: θ ←θ + ηπ∇θLπ
Entropy α update: α ←α −ηα∇αeα( 1
B
P H[πθ(xi)] −εH)
KL β update: β ←β −ηβ∇βeβ( 1
B
P DKL(xi)] −εKL)
end
end
// Behavior Policy Update
θ′ ←θ
end
return Trained policy πθ
30