--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SESAMO: SYMMETRY-ENFORCING STOCHASTIC
MODULATION FOR NORMALIZING FLOWS
Janik Kreit1,2∗
Dominic Schuh1,2∗
Kim A. Nicoli1,2,3∗
Lena Funcke1,2∗
1Transdisciplinary Research Area (TRA) Matter, University of Bonn, Germany
2Helmholtz Institute for Radiation and Nuclear Physics (HISKP), University of Bonn, Germany
3Oldendorff Carriers GmbH & Co. KG, Lübeck, Germany
ABSTRACT
Deep generative models have recently garnered significant attention across various
fields, from physics to chemistry, where sampling from unnormalized Boltzmann-
like distributions represents a fundamental challenge. In particular, autoregressive
models and normalizing flows have become prominent due to their appealing ability
to yield closed-form probability densities. Moreover, it is well-established that
incorporating prior knowledge—such as symmetries—into deep neural networks
can substantially improve training performances. In this context, recent advances
have focused on developing symmetry-equivariant generative models, achiev-
ing remarkable results. Building upon these foundations, this paper introduces
Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo). Similar to equivariant
normalizing flows, SESaMo enables the incorporation of inductive biases (e.g.,
symmetries) into normalizing flows through a novel technique called stochastic
modulation. This approach enhances the flexibility of the generative model by
enforcing exact symmetries while, for the first time, enabling the model to learn bro-
ken symmetries during training. Our numerical experiments benchmark SESaMo in
different scenarios, including an 8-Gaussian mixture model and physically relevant
field theories, such as the ϕ4 theory and the Hubbard model.
1
INTRODUCTION
Sampling from unnormalized Boltzmann distributions is an ubiquitous yet challenging task across
various fields, including physics (1), chemistry (2), and economics (3). These distributions are
typically of the form p(x) = exp (−f[x])/Z, where f[·] is a functional representing, for example,
the potential of a chemical compound or the action of a physical system, while Z, the normalization
constant (or partition function), is often unknown. While f[·] is usually available in closed form, as it
describes the microscopic dynamics of the system under study, computing Z would require solving a
functional or high-dimensional integral, which is generally intractable. In fact, for many systems of
interest, sampling from Boltzmann distributions has been proven to be NP-hard (4), making it highly
unlikely that a polynomial-time algorithm exists for this problem. Due to this complexity, sampling
from unnormalized Boltzmann distributions is traditionally performed using Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods (5), where a randomly initialized Markov chain is guaranteed to converge
to the target distribution. Despite numerous advanced MCMC techniques, significant challenges
remain. In chemical and biological systems, for instance, sampling can be hindered by high-energy
barriers separating metastable states, posing a major obstacle for tasks such as protein folding (6).
In physics, MCMC methods often suffer from slow convergence due to autocorrelations between
samples, necessitating longer simulations to obtain statistically independent samples and thereby
increasing computational costs (7).
Over the past decade, deep generative models (8) have achieved remarkable success in sampling from
Boltzmann distributions within the framework of variational inference (VI) (9). In particular, Ref. (10)
introduced Boltzmann Generators (BGs), an approach in which a variational (parametrized) probabil-
∗Correspondence to jkreit@uni-bonn.de,
schuh@hiskp.uni-bonn.de,
kim.a.nicoli@gmail.com,
and
lfuncke@uni-bonn.de
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ity density qθ ∈Q is learned, using a generative model, to approximate the target distribution 1 of a
chemical system, i.e., qθ ≈p. Around the same time, concurrent studies proposed similar ideas in
the contexts of statistical physics (11; 12) and lattice quantum field theories (13; 14). A distinctive
feature of BGs is that they rely on generative models capable of providing the learned variational
density in closed form. These include autoregressive neural networks (15; 16) and normalizing flows
(NFs) (17; 18), which are particularly suited for sampling discrete and continuous degrees of freedom,
respectively. In the remainder of this work, we primarily focus on NFs, although extensions to other
generative models that allow exact likelihood computation are also possible.
Despite their potential to overcome some limitations of traditional MCMC sampling, deep generative
models present challenges of their own. In particular, to ensure reliable sampling from the target
density with suitable asymptotic guarantees (12), these models must first be trained to a sufficiently
high standard. Deep generative models, such as NFs, are parametrized by deep neural networks
with numerous trainable parameters, which may require a substantial computational effort (training)
to converge. To accelerate training, it has been shown that incorporating inductive biases, such as
symmetry constraints, into the model architecture can lead to faster and more robust convergence.
A seminal example are convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which exhibit built-in translational
equivariance (19). This concept has been generalized to arbitrary symmetry groups and manifolds (20;
21; 22). Similar ideas have been extensively leveraged in scientific applications, where chemical and
physical systems are often rich in symmetries (23; 24; 25; 26).
In this paper, we propose a general framework for embedding arbitrary symmetries into the training
protocol of NFs, which we term Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo). Our
approach leverages the prior knowledge (symmetries) from the unnormalized log probability to train
a NF and uses an independent random variable to infer the correct probability mass for each mode
of the target distribution. Crucially, this approach holds promise for mitigating—and potentially
overcoming—the fundamental challenge of mode collapse in variational inference (27; 28). We focus
on a setting in which no samples from the target distribution are available, and mode collapse is
particularly prominent. However, we emphasize that our method is not limited to the data-free case.
In summary, the contributions of this work are threefold:
• We propose Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo), a novel approach to
incorporate continuous and discrete symmetries (broken and exact) into flow-based models.
• We numerically enforce bijectivity by introducing a penalty term in the loss function.
• We conduct extensive numerical experiments to validate our theory on both toy problems
and real-world benchmarks for lattice quantum field theories.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the necessary background
on NFs and variational inference. We also discuss how symmetries can be incorporated into flow-
based models and establish the notation used throughout the manuscript. In Sec. 3, we present our
stochastic modulation approach. Finally, in Sec. 4, we validate our approach, both on a standard
benchmark and on tasks of practical relevance, such as sampling lattice quantum field theories,
including the ϕ4 theory and the Hubbard model. In Sec. 5, we discuss the limitations of our
algorithm, and we conclude by summarizing our findings and outlining potential directions for future
work in Sec. 6.
1.1
RELATED WORK
The field of geometric deep learning (29), which investigates the mathematical foundations of
deep learning on geometric structures—particularly group-equivariant and gauge-equivariant neural
networks—has advanced significantly in recent years. For a comprehensive review of common
methodologies, we refer to Refs. (30; 31).
Köhler et al. (32) proposed a way to build NFs that are equivariant under the symmetries of the target p,
ensuring that the variational distribution qθ inherently respects these symmetries, thereby improving
both accuracy and efficiency. This work laid the foundation for the development of equivariant NFs
across various applications. Satorras et al. (33) proposed a generative model equivariant to Euclidean
1For notational convenience, we use the same symbol for a distribution and its density with respect to the
Lebesgue measure.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
symmetries, integrating E(n)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) (25) within a continuous
NF framework (34), yielding an invertible map that preserves Euclidean invariances. Bose et al. (35)
addressed the general problem of constructing equivariant diffeomorphisms with an equivariant
finite NF, specifically targeting finite symmetry groups and compact spaces. In high-energy physics,
Kanwar et al. (36) and Boyda et al. (37) adapted NFs to respect Abelian and non-Abelian gauge
symmetries, respectively. In condensed matter physics, Schuh et al. (38) demonstrated the importance
of enforcing equivariance in NFs for symmetry-rich systems like the Hubbard model, showing that
equivariance is crucial for accurately learning the target density and overcoming ergodicity issues.
For atomistic systems (39) and atomic solids (40), Wirnsberger et al. introduced NFs equipped with
permutation-equivariant diffeomorphisms. More recently, Midgley et al. (41) introduced NFs that
inherently respects SE(3) group symmetries—comprising translations, rotations, and reflections—as
well as permutation invariance. Furthermore, Klein et al. (42) proposed equivariant flow matching,
a training objective based on optimal transport flow matching that leverages inherent symmetries
in physical systems, enabling simulation-free training of equivariant continuous normalizing flows
(CNFs). In the context of diffusion models (43), Hoogeboom et al. (44) introduced an E(3)-equivariant
diffusion model for 3D molecular generation, which, similar to (33), enforces Euclidean invariance
under translations and rotations. Lastly, Pires et al. (45) showed that a Variational Mixture of NFs
(VMoNF) can model the symmetries of labelled data.
2
PRELIMINARIES
2.1
NORMALIZING FLOWS
Normalizing flows (NFs) (18) are a class of generative models that provide an effective framework
for approximating complicated probability distributions. Commonly employed in the context of vari-
ational inference (VI) (46), NFs operate by transforming a simple, well-understood, prior distribution
(typically a Gaussian) into a target distribution through a sequence of invertible and differentiable
mappings. A key advantage of NFs is their ability to efficiently sample from approximated high-
dimensional distributions while retaining the capability to compute exact likelihoods. This exact
likelihood computation distinguishes NFs from many other generative models, making them particu-
larly well-suited for learning probability distributions in scientific applications, such as chemistry (10)
and physics (14). NFs can be categorized based on how the mappings between the prior density and
the target distribution are constructed. These categories include coupling-based NFs (47; 48; 49),
autoregressive NFs (50), and continuous NFs (34). For the sake of simplicity, this paper primarily
focuses on coupling-based NFs, although extensions to other types of NFs are possible.
At the heart of NFs lies the concept of a bijective transformation that maps samples from a prior
distribution z ∼q0(z) (such as a multivariate Gaussian) to samples from a variational distribution
x ∼qθ, which is meant to approximate a target p. This typically happens by means of a learnable
function
gθ : z ∼q0 →x ∼qθ(x) ,
(1)
where the transformation gθ is parametrized by a neural network. To increase the flexibility of NFs,
multiple transformations (coupling blocks) can be composed, allowing for more expressive mappings
between prior and target distributions, gθ(z) = gθT ◦gθT −1 ◦. . . ◦gθ1(z). A key feature of NFs
is that the transformation must be invertible, allowing the likelihood of the target distribution to be
computed exactly using the change of variables formula
qθ(x) = q0(g−1
θ (x))
det
∂g−1
θ (x)
∂x
 .
(2)
For a comprehensive overview of NFs, we refer to the review papers (18; 51). In this work, we focus
mainly on affine NF architectures, such as RealNVP (48) and NICE (47).
2.2
THE KULLBACK-LEIBLER DIVERGENCE
In the context of Variational Inference, the parameters θ of NFs are trained by minimizing the
so-called (reverse) Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (52)
KL(qθ ∥p) = −Ex∼qθ

ln ˜p(x)
qθ(x)

+ ln Z ,
(3)
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
z
q0
CT,z
zc
qzc
gθ
˜zc
q˜zc
C−1
T,z
x
qθ
Figure 1: Visualization of the canonicalization approach making a flow-based model equivariant
with respect to a Z2 symmetry.
where ˜p(x) = exp (−f[x]) and qθ(x) are the unnormalized target and the parametrized probability
distributions, respectively. The logarithm of the unknown partition function simply appears as an
additive term, which vanishes upon taking the gradient. It should also be noted that the KL divergence
is not symmetric, i.e., KL(qθ ∥p) ̸= KL(p ∥qθ). Consequently, training using Eq. (3) differs from
the practice of maximum likelihood training, which employs the forward KL-divergence—a common
approach in, e.g., computer vision applications (50). This distinction is significant: In Variational
Inference, access to training data is often unavailable, and models must be trained solely using the
closed-form unnormalized log probability ˜p, which is the focus of this work.
2.3
EQUIVARIANT NORMALIZING FLOWS
In previous works, several attempts have been made to incorporate prior knowledge into NFs and
make them equivariant with respect to certain symmetry groups. The main result stemming from (32)
is summarised in the following theorem:
Theorem 1 (Köhler et al., (2020)) Let’s assume H is a group acting on Rn, q0 is the base density
of a flow-based transformation with qθ being the transformed density under the diffeomorphism
gθ : Rn →Rn. If gθ is an H-equivariant diffeomorphism and q0 is an H-invariant density with
respect to the same group H, then qθ is also an H-invariant density on Rn.
Specifically, this theorem provides a general protocol to build an equivariant NF by choosing an
appropriate invertible map gθ that is H-equivariant. However, despite the generality of this result,
defining equivariant diffeomorphisms that allow for tractable inverses and Jacobians—both essential
for building an NF—remains an open challenge. Indeed, different approaches have been leveraged in
recent works to build equivariant flow-based models.
2.3.1
EQUIVARIANT NEURAL NETWORKS
In coupling-based NFs, the diffeomorphism gθ is often parametrized by a neural network (NN). A
straightforward approach to enforce equivariance (or invariance) (53; 54) is to design an NN that
explicitly satisfies these symmetry requirements. However, a significant limitation of this method is
that constructing such constrained architectures is neither always possible nor straightforward. One
instance where this approach is feasible is in the case of a Z2 symmetry. Indeed, recent work showed
how to build manifestly sign-equivariant architectures (55). For example, a simple strategy to achieve
sign equivariance in NNs is to use equivariant activation functions, such as tanh, and omit bias terms,
ensuring that the resulting NN remains equivariant. Indeed, this approach was successfully applied
for training Z2-equivariant NFs in the context of lattice quantum field theories (14; 56; 57).
2.3.2
CANONICALIZATION
The idea of canonicalization, largely motivated by Theorem 1, has been widely explored in the
context of flow-based sampling for lattice field theories (36). Indeed, physical systems are rich in
global (and local) symmetries, and being able to develop equivariant flows fulfilling these constraints
is a very active area of research. The key idea is to use a transformation CT,z to map a sample from
the base density to a so-called canonical cell Ω, see (37). The NF then transforms the canonicalized
sample, before the inverse C−1
T,z is applied to map the sample back to its original space. We refer
to Fig. 3 and App. B for more details. A parametric map gθ is equivariant to a generic transformation
T if
gθ(Tx) = Tgθ(x) =⇒gθ(x) = T −1gθ(Tx) .
(4)
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
For example, for the sign-flipping Z2 transformation mentioned above, the transformation reads
TZ2 : x →−x .
(5)
A canonical map CT,z transforms samples z ∈Rn, where z ∼q0, to the canonical Ω
CT,z : z ∈Rn →zc ∈Ω
with the inverse
C−1
T,z : ezc ∈eΩ→x ∈Rn.
(6)
The two manifolds Ωand eΩare connected by the diffeomorphism gθ acting in the canonical space,
i.e.,
gθ : zc ∈Ω→ezc ∈eΩ
and
g−1
θ
: ezc ∈eΩ→zc ∈Ω.
(7)
Note that CT,z depends on some specific symmetry transformation T, see Eq. (4), which makes
the canonicalized flow egθ(z) = C−1
T,z gθ CT,z(z) equivariant. Focusing on the sign-flipping Z2
transformation mentioned above, we have
CT,z : z 7→

z ,
if z ∈Ω
−z ,
else
(8)
where the canonical cell in this case is Ω= {z ∈Rn s.t. Pn
i=1 zi ≥0}. See Fig. 1 for a visual
intuition. This approach can be generalised for z ∈Rn and a set of M symmetry transformations
{Ti} such that
CT,z : z 7→









z,
if z ∈Ω
T1z,
elif z ∈A1
...
TMz,
elif z ∈AM
with inverse
C−1
T,z : x 7→









x,
if z ∈Ω
T −1
1
x,
elif z ∈A1
...
T −1
M x,
elif z ∈AM
(9)
where Ai denote different regions of the target space, for example corresponding to different modes
of the target distribution. Note that the inverse transformation C−1
T,z depends on the input z, i.e., the
information about the origin of the sample in the base space must be retained in the transformation.
A proof that the canonicalization approach is equivariant is given in App. C.
2.3.3
CONSTRAINTS ON CANONICALIZATION
In order to enforce equivariance via canonicalization, two constraints must be met: first the prior
distribution q0 must be invariant under any symmetry transformation Ti (32), i.e., q0(z) = q0(Tiz).
Second, gθ should not map samples outside of the canonical cell, i.e., ˜zc = gθ(CT,z z) ∈Ω. While
the former constraint can be readily verified, the latter may not hold for any general NF. We enforce
this latter constraint by introducing a regularization term
Λ(˜zc) = A · σ(B · λ(˜zc)) · Θ(λ(˜zc)) ,
(10)
where λ(˜zc) is a penalty function being zero for a general input ˜zc at the boundary ∂Ωof the
canonical cell Ω, negative for ˜zc ∈Ω, and positive for ˜zc /∈Ω. The Heaviside step function Θ(·)
ensures that the penalty term is zero for ˜zc ∈Ω, while the sigmoid function σ(·) ensures that the
penalty function has a gradient pointing toward the canonical cell Ω. The hyperparameters A, B ∈R
are used to scale the amplitude and the gradient of the function, respectively. While A needs to match
at least the order of magnitude of the loss function, B must be chosen sufficiently small to ensure
non-vanishing gradients for ˜zc /∈Ω. This regularization term is added to Eq. (3) during the training
of a NF. We provide further details about the penalty term in App. D.
3
PROPOSED METHOD: SESAMO
Crucially, certain symmetries may be difficult to incorporate through naive canonicalization strategies
and are unlikely to be effectively captured by standard flow-based generative models. A representative
case is a one-dimensional multimodal distribution with modes of unequal probability mass (see
App. E and App. H). Our proposed method, Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo),
introduces a novel stochastic modulation mechanism that is described in detail in Sec. 3.1.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
z
q0
gθ
ex
eqθ
Su
x
qθ
Figure 2: Visualization of the stochastic modulation approach for enforcing a Z2 symmetry in a
flow-based model.
3.1
STOCHASTIC MODULATION
Stochastic modulation involves drawing samples ex from a flow-based sampler with density eqθ(ex).
Prior samples z ∼q0 (left panel in Fig. 2) are shifted by the flow gθ into the canonical cell Ωto
align with one of the modes, producing ex ∼eqθ with ex ∈Ω(center panel). This shift is induced by
the penalty term Λ(ex) in Eq. (10). The samples ex are then transformed according to the stochastic
modulation Su (right panel), which is conditioned on a random variable u, resulting in an output
density
qθ,b(x) =
X
u
pS,b(u) · q0

eg−1
θ,u(x)

·
det
 
∂eg−1
θ,u
∂x
! .
(11)
Here, pS,b(u) is the modulation probability that depends on learnable parameters b, whose number is
fixed by the symmetry type. The diffeomorphic map from the base density q0(z) to the final density
reads
egθ,u(z) = Su(gθ(z)) ,
(12)
such that
det
∂egθ,u
∂z

= det
∂Su
∂gθ

det
∂gθ
∂z

.
(13)
A general stochastic modulation ST,u for a set of M transformations {Ti} reads
ST,u : x 7→









x,
if u = 0
T1x,
elif u = 1
...
TMx,
elif u = M
with
u ∼pS,b
(14)
where the transformations Ti map samples x ∼qθ(x) to distinct regions in the configuration
space, potentially corresponding to different modes of the target distribution p(x). We note that
Ti ̸= Tj, ∀i ̸= j and that Tix /∈Ω, in order to avoid any overlap between distributions and thus
preserve bijectivity.
From Eqs. (11)–(13), if u ∼pS,b(u) is sampled and not marginalized, we can write the log probability
as
ln qθ(egθ,u(z)) = ln pS,b(u) + ln q0(z) −ln
det ∂Su
∂gθ
 −ln
det ∂gθ
∂z
 ,
(15)
where z = eg−1
θ,u(x) and pS,b(u) is the probability of sampling the random variable u. To better
understand this mechanism, let us again consider a target density with Z2 symmetry. In this specific
case, we define a random variable u ∈{0, 1} that follows a Bernoulli distribution B(eb) and
Su : x →

x
if u = 0
−x
if u = 1
with
u ∼pS,b = B(eb)
and
b = ln 0.5 .
(16)
For a broken Z2 symmetry on the other hand, the modulation probability is given in terms of a
learnable parameter b ∈R−and reads
pS,b =
1 −eb
if u = 0
eb
if u = 1 .
(17)
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Target: p
Prior: z ∼q0
gθ
Ω
ST,u
ex ∼eqθ
x ∼qθ(x)
Target: p
Prior: z ∼q0
CT,z
gθ
Ω
zc ∼qzc
C−1
T,z
ezc ∼qezc
x ∼qθ(x)
Figure 3: Illustration of Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo) (top row) and
canonicalization (bottom row), shown for an example target distribution and corresponding prior.
Unlike canonicalization, SESaMo (illustrated in the upper row of Fig. 3) employs a flow gθ that
shifts the prior density q0 so that it captures a single mode of the target density within the canonical
cell. This shift is induced by the penalty term Λ(ex). After this alignment step, the probability mass
is redistributed according to Su. In contrast, canonicalization (shown in the lower row of Fig. 3)
applies a fixed transformation CT,z that maps z directly into the canonical cell. Consequently,
unlike canonicalization, SESaMo does not require the prior q0 to be invariant under the symmetry
transformation, which makes it applicable in a broader range of settings.
Similarly to canonicalization, stochastic modulation requires the map Su to be bijective. This
property is enforced by the penalty term introduced in Sec. 2.3.3. An extended comparison between
canonicalization and stochastic modulation is provided in App.B. A pseudocode representation of
SESaMo can be found in Sec. A.
If the probability mass is not evenly distributed among the modes of the target density (e.g., b ̸= ln 0.5
for a Z2 symmetry), having a learnable parameter b allows SESaMo to effectively capture the broken
symmetry. This case is further detailed in App. E. We also stress that SESaMo extends beyond
discrete symmetries. Appendix F develops a formulation for (broken) continuous symmetries, where
u is a continuous variable instead of a discrete one.
3.2
LOSS FUNCTION AND REINFORCE ESTIMATOR
For training, the standard reverse KL divergence is extended by the penalty term Λ(·)
f
KL(qθ || p) = Ez∼q0Eu∼pS,b [ ln qθ(egθ,u(z)) + f[egθ,u(z)] + Λ(gθ(z))] ,
(18)
stemming from Sec. 2.3.3. Since the parameter b of the stochastic modulation is only present in the
modulation probability pS,b the REINFORCE estimator (58) is used to enable gradient computation
through the random variable u
∂
∂bEu∼pS,b [ln qθ(egθ,u(z)) + f[egθ,u(z)]] = Eu∼pS,b

(ln qθ(egθ,u(z)) + f[egθ,u(z)]) · ∂
∂b ln pS,b(u)

.
(19)
4
NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present numerical experiments that compare the performance of four approaches:
Flow Annealed Importance Sampling Bootstrap (FAB) (59), RealNVP with Variational Mixture
of Normalizing Flows (VMoNF) (45), RealNVP with canonicalization (37), and RealNVP with
stochastic modulation (SESaMo). We benchmark these approaches both on toy problems and on
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 4: Gaussian mixture target density (broken Z8 symmetry). All flow-based models are trained
until convergence. From left to right we show: the ground truth, VMoNF, canonicalization, and
SESaMo (ours). We refer to App. I for more details on the experiments.
physically relevant tasks. To evaluate the effectiveness of each approach, we use the the KL divergence
(if the normalization Z is known) and the effective sample size (ESS) (12), as a performance metric.
The ESS quantifies the accuracy with which the approximation qθ matches the target probability
distribution p. Bounded between zero and one, the ESS reaches its optimal value (ESS = 1) when
the approximation is exact (qθ = p). Although the ESS is not a good metric if the distribution lacks
full mode coverage, the symmetry-enforcing architecture guarantees us to capture all modes, making
the ESS a valid metric to quantify SESaMo’s performance.
The code used to run these experiments builds on an earlier release of (60). A live version is available
at github.com/fifi-research/sesamo, and a static, archived snapshot is provided in Ref. (61).
4.1
TOY EXAMPLE: GAUSSIAN MIXTURE
We initially consider a probability distribution in two dimensions whose density is given by
p(x) = 1
Z
N
X
k=1
exp
 
−(x −µk)2
2
−α(x1 + x2)
!
,
µk = R ·

cos
2πk
N

, sin
2πk
N
T
,
(20)
where Z = 2π PN
k=1 exp
 α2 −αR
√
2 sin( 2πk
N + π
4 )

is the normalization, N ∈N+ is the number
of Gaussians, R ∈R+ is the radius of the circle around which they are located, and α ∈R breaks
the ZN symmetry of this model. In this study, we use N = 8, R = 12, and α = 0 (α = 0.05),
which results in a (broken) Z8 symmetry. In Tab. 1, we report the ESS and KL divergence achieved
after convergence, and we visualize the corresponding target density in Fig. 4. Even though VMoNF
has the ability that different NFs learn different sectors of the target distribution, it collapses to the
three most likely modes in the lower left. This is not an issue of the architecture itself but the mode
collapsing behaviour of the reverse KL that is used in this work. Overall, SESaMo achieves the best
performance, outperforming the other baselines and yielding higher accuracy. For more details we
refer to App. H.
4.2
PHYSICS EXAMPLE: LATTICE QUANTUM FIELD THEORY
Sampling using NFs has become ubiquitous across various fields of physics, yielding particularly
notable results for sampling lattice quantum chromodynamics (62), scalar lattice quantum field
theories (14; 63), and condensed matter systems (38). We refer to (64) for a comprehensive overview.
In what follows, we primarily focus on two pertinent benchmarks: the complex ϕ4 theory and the
Hubbard model. We direct readers seeking further technical details regarding the physics to App. G.
In lattice quantum field theory, the probability distribution of a system is given by a Boltzmann-like
density p(x) = exp(−f[x])/Z, where f[x] is a functional known as the action, Z is an unknown
partition function, and x denotes the lattice fields. Note that, as discussed in Sec. 3, for the following
experiments we optimize the symmetry breaking parameter b during training, which, as shown in
App. H, perfectly agrees with the analytical prediction.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The complex ϕ4 scalar field theory in two dimensions
The complex ϕ4 theory offers a simple yet
versatile framework for investigating interacting scalar fields. It plays a crucial role in understanding
spontaneous symmetry breaking (including the Higgs mechanism) and critical phenomena (65), while
providing a key testbed for the machine learning community to develop theoretical techniques and
numerical methods (66; 67; 68). We consider the action with quartic interactions,
f[x] =
X
j∈V

−2κ
2
X
ˆµ=1
(xjxj+ˆµ) + (1 −2λ)x2
j + λx4
j + αRe[xj]

,
(21)
where x = x1 + ix2 are the complex scalar fields, the subscript j labels the lattice sites in the
two-dimensional lattice volume V = Nx × Nt = 8 × 8, the κ and λ are the couplings of the
theory, and ˆµ denotes the interactions between nearest neighbours. The term α Re(x) introduces
an additional component designed to break the continuous U(1) symmetry of the theory, thereby
increasing the complexity of the learning task.2 We emphasize that while prior studies have often
focused on real scalar fields, physical fields are complex-valued. Therefore, we compare SESaMo
with FAB and VMoNF when sampling x ∈Cn. Canonicalization could not be applied here. The
ESS obtained by each model is detailed in Tab. 1 for both broken (α ̸= 0) and unbroken (α = 0)
U(1) symmetry. Across both conditions, SESaMo achieved the highest ESS, indicating its superior
ability to incorporate the underlying physical symmetries into the flow model. Additional results,
including the density plots, are available in App. H. Moreover, App. H also demonstrates how
SESaMo outperforms the baselines of RealNVP and canonicalization in the case of real scalar field
theory.
The Hubbard model in two dimensions
The Hubbard model is a cornerstone of condensed matter
physics, providing a fundamental description of interacting electrons on a lattice and playing a pivotal
role in studying phenomena such as magnetism, metal-insulator transitions, and high-temperature
superconductivity (70). For our numerical experiments, we adopt the setup as detailed in (38; 71),
with the action—featuring a broken Z4 symmetry—given by
f[x] = 1
2eU
X
j∈V
x2
j −log det M [x] −log det M[−x] ,
(22)
where the coupling eU describes the interaction strength, M[·] is the fermion matrix describing the
interacting fermions (particles), x are auxiliary bosonic fields, and the subscript j labels the lattice
sites in the lattice volume V = Nx × Nt. While for the GMM and the complex ϕ4 theory we focused
on small lattice volumes as a proof-of-principle demonstration, here we include both a small volume
of V = 2×1 to compare with analytical solutions and a large volume of V = 18×100 to demonstrate
the scalability of our approach. We refer to Apps. E, G, H, and (38) for more details about the model.
For learning the Boltzmann distribution, we again compare FAB, VMoNF, canonicalization, and
SESaMo. For the smaller volume of V = 2 × 1, the ESS and KL divergence are reported in Tab. 1,
and the resulting probability density after training is shown in Fig. 5. For the larger volume of
V = 18 × 100, the ESS is also listed in Tab. 1, whereas the KL divergence cannot be reported due to
the unknown normalization of the target distribution. FAB is not feasible at this lattice volume. As
before, SESaMo achieves the highest ESS and exhibits faster and more stable convergence compared
to the other baselines. For further results and density plots illustrating that SESaMo mitigates mode
collapse (72), we refer the reader to App. H. While Schuh et al. (38) first demonstrated the application
of NFs to the Hubbard model using canonicalization and small lattice volumes of V = 2 × 2,
SESaMo with the objective in Eq. (18) crucially achieves a higher ESS, perfectly learns the broken Z4
symmetry, and scales to lattice volumes of up to V = 18 × 100 (broken (Z2)18 symmetry), thereby
establishing a new state-of-the-art.
5
LIMITATIONS
A primary limitation of SESaMo stems from the requirement that the symmetry sectors must be
known a priori to apply the stochastic modulation. Nevertheless, for applications in physics and
2This system can serve as a proxy to describe a quantum field theory with two flavors of differing masses (69).
3The reverse KL divergence can only be computed if the normalization of the probability distribution is
known, which is the case for the GMM and the Hubbard model with V = 2 × 1.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 5: Density for the Hubbard model (broken Z4 symmetry) for V = Nx × Nt = 2 × 1. All flow-
based models are trained until convergence. From left to right we show: the ground truth, VMoNF,
canonicalization, and SESaMo (ours). We refer to App. I for more details on the experiments.
Model
Volume
Symmetry
FAB
VMoNF
Canon.
SESaMo
ESS
GMM
2 × 1
exact Z8
0.78(3)
0.61(1)
0.91(8)
0.9986(2)
GMM
2 × 1
broken Z8
0.81(1)
0.83(11)
0.747(2)
0.9947(3)
ϕ4 theory
8 × 8
exact U(1)
0.26(3)
0.22(2)
–
0.9472(8)
ϕ4 theory
8 × 8
broken U(1)
0.28(5)
0.23(1)
–
0.941(2)
Hubbard
2 × 1
broken Z4
0.946(9)
0.37(12)
0.839(5)
0.996(1)
Hubbard
18 × 100
broken (Z2)18
0.06(5)
–
0.024(1)
0.74(1)
KL
GMM
2 × 1
exact Z8
1.19(37)
0.79(11)
0.013(2)
0.0008(1)
GMM
2 × 1
broken Z8
0.84(26)
1.02(14)
0.189(3)
0.0024(2)
Hubbard
2 × 1
broken Z4
0.28(8)
0.74(9)
0.112(7)
0.0013(8)
Table 1: Effective sample size (ESS, higher is better) and KL divergence3 (smaller is better) after con-
vergence for different benchmarks. Best results (averages over ten different models) are highlighted
in bold.
chemistry, this may not pose a significant problem. Indeed, the well-defined symmetries inherent
in many physical and chemical systems often allow for the prior determination of the symmetry
sectors, thereby enabling the application of stochastic modulation. Another limitation arises from the
penalty term in Eq. (10), which enforces bijectivity of the NF. If the target density assigns non-zero
probability at the border of the canonical cell, bijectivity can only be maintained approximately. As
a result, the ESS may decrease if only samples that strictly preserve bijectivity are accepted. For
example, in the Gaussian mixture model discussed in Sec. 4.1, decreasing the radius R causes the
modes to move closer together, thereby increasing the density near the border of the canonical cell.
However, in many high-dimensional physics applications, the distance between modes typically
increases with the dimensionality of the system, thereby mitigating the impact of bijectivity violations.
Nonetheless, we emphasize that these limitations are not specific to SESaMo, but is shared with
canonicalization.
6
CONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic Modulation (SESaMo)—a novel and flexible
approach for constructing symmetry-enhanced NFs. Moreover, we propose an additional penalty term
to the reverse KL divergence to enforce numerical bijectivity. Our extensive numerical experiments
demonstrate that stochastic modulation outperforms naïve NFs, mixture models and canonicalization
methods. We envision SESaMo as a powerful tool for incorporating inductive biases into generative
models when learning target probability densities with challenging symmetries—an essential feature
in fields like physics and chemistry. Future work will explore the broader capabilities of SESaMo
and assess its potential to achieve state-of-the-art performance not only against generative neural
samplers but also relative to established numerical techniques, such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We provide our source code under the MIT license at github.com/fifi-research/sesamo. A static,
archived version of the code is available in Ref. (61). The repository contains training scripts and
instructions to reproduce all main experiments. We specify all hyperparameters in Appendix I and
provide default configuration files. Experiments were conducted with Python 3.9 and PyTorch 2.7 on
NVIDIA A100 GPUs, but the code runs on other CUDA-enabled GPUs as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Luca Johannes Wagner for inspiring discussions during the development of this
method and Simran Singh for suggesting to extend SESaMo to continuous symmetries. The authors
also thank Shinichi Nakajima and Jan Gerken for useful discussions on earlier versions of this work.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the access to the Marvin cluster of the University of Bonn. This
project was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
as part of the CRC 1639 NuMeriQS – project no. 511713970.
REFERENCES
[1] Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W. Rosenbluth, Marshall N. Rosenbluth, Augusta H. Teller, and
Edward Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The Journal of
Chemical Physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 06 1953.
[2] Linus Görlitz, Zhenglei Gao, and Walter Schmitt. Statistical analysis of chemical transformation
kinetics using markov-chain monte carlo methods. Environmental Science & Technology,
45(10):4429–4437, 05 2011.
[3] A. Dragulescu and V. M. Yakovenko. Statistical mechanics of money. The European Physical
Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 17(4):723–729, 2000.
[4] F. Barahona. On the computational complexity of ising spin glass models. Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and General, 15(10):3241, oct 1982.
[5] Christophe Andrieu, Nando de Freitas, Arnaud Doucet, and Michael I. Jordan. An introduction
to mcmc for machine learning. Machine Learning, 50(1):5–43, 2003.
[6] Alan R. Fersht and Valerie Daggett. Protein folding and unfolding at atomic resolution. Cell,
108(4):573–582, 2002.
[7] Ulli Wolff. Critical slowing down. Nuclear Physics B - Proceedings Supplements, 17:93–102,
1990.
[8] Sam Bond-Taylor, Adam Leach, Yang Long, and Chris G. Willcocks. Deep generative modelling:
A comparative review of vaes, gans, normalizing flows, energy-based and autoregressive models.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(11):7327–7347, 2022.
[9] Denis Blessing, Xiaogang Jia, Johannes Esslinger, Francisco Vargas, and Gerhard Neumann.
Beyond ELBOs: A large-scale evaluation of variational methods for sampling. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[10] Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling
equilibrium states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457):eaaw1147,
2019.
[11] Dian Wu, Lei Wang, and Pan Zhang. Solving statistical mechanics using variational autoregres-
sive networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 122:080602, 2019.
[12] Kim A. Nicoli, Shinichi Nakajima, Nils Strodthoff, Wojciech Samek, et al. Asymptotically
unbiased estimation of physical observables with neural samplers. Phys. Rev. E, 101:023304,
2020.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
[13] M. S. Albergo, G. Kanwar, and P. E. Shanahan. Flow-based generative models for Markov
chain Monte Carlo in lattice field theory. Phys. Rev. D, 100:034515, aug 2019.
[14] Kim A. Nicoli, Christopher J. Anders, Lena Funcke, Tobias Hartung, et al. Estimation of
thermodynamic observables in lattice field theories with deep generative models. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 126:032001, 2021.
[15] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, koray kavukcuoglu, et al. Conditional
image generation with pixelcnn decoders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 29, page 4797–4805, 2016.
[16] Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural net-
works. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1747–1756, 2016.
[17] Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pages
1530–1538, 2015.
[18] Ivan Kobyzev, Simon JD Prince, and Marcus A Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction
and review of current methods. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
43(11):3964–3979, 2020.
[19] Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, et al. Backpropagation applied
to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Computation, 1(4):541–551, 1989.
[20] Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In Proceedings of
The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 2990–2999. PMLR, 20–22 Jun 2016.
[21] Taco S. Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas Köhler, and Max Welling. Spherical CNNs. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[22] Taco Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and Max Welling.
Gauge equivariant
convolutional networks and the icosahedral CNN. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
[23] Kristof Schütt, Oliver Unke, and Michael Gastegger. Equivariant message passing for the
prediction of tensorial properties and molecular spectra. In Proceedings of the 38th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 9377–9388. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
[24] Alexander Bogatskiy, Brandon Anderson, Jan Offermann, Marwah Roussi, David Miller,
et al. Lorentz group equivariant neural network for particle physics. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 992–1002. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
[25] Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant graph neural
networks. In ICML, pages 9323–9332, 2021.
[26] Di Luo, Giuseppe Carleo, Bryan K. Clark, and James Stokes. Gauge equivariant neural networks
for quantum lattice gauge theories. Phys. Rev. Lett., 127:276402, dec 2021.
[27] Roman Soletskyi, Marylou Gabrié, and Bruno Loureiro. A theoretical perspective on mode
collapse in variational inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13300, 2024.
[28] Kim A. Nicoli, Christopher J. Anders, Tobias Hartung, Karl Jansen, Pan Kessel, et al. Detecting
and mitigating mode-collapse for flow-based sampling of lattice field theories. Phys. Rev. D,
108:114501, dec 2023.
[29] Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst.
Geometric deep learning: Going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
34(4):18–42, 2017.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
[30] Jan E. Gerken, Jimmy Aronsson, Oscar Carlsson, Hampus Linander, Fredrik Ohlsson, et al.
Geometric deep learning and equivariant neural networks.
Artificial Intelligence Review,
56(12):14605–14662, 2023.
[31] Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veliˇckovi´c. Geometric deep learning:
Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
[32] Jonas Köhler, Leon Klein, and Frank Noe. Equivariant flows: Exact likelihood generative
learning for symmetric densities. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 5361–
5370. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
[33] Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, Fabian Bernd Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Max
Welling. E(n) equivariant normalizing flows. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2021.
[34] Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
differential equations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
[35] Avishek Joey Bose, Marcus Brubaker, and Ivan Kobyzev. Equivariant finite normalizing flows.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08649, 2021.
[36] Gurtej Kanwar, Michael S. Albergo, Denis Boyda, Kyle Cranmer, Daniel C. Hackett, et al.
Equivariant flow-based sampling for lattice gauge theory. Phys. Rev. Lett., 125:121601, sep
2020.
[37] Denis Boyda, Gurtej Kanwar, Sébastien Racanière, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Michael S.
Albergo, Kyle Cranmer, Daniel C. Hackett, and Phiala E. Shanahan. Sampling using SU(N)
gauge equivariant flows. Phys. Rev. D, 103(7):074504, 2021.
[38] Dominic Schuh, Janik Kreit, Evan Berkowitz, Lena Funcke, Thomas Luu, Kim A Nicoli,
and Marcel Rodekamp. Simulating the hubbard model with equivariant normalizing flows.
arXiv:2501.07371, 2025.
[39] Peter Wirnsberger, Andrew J. Ballard, George Papamakarios, Stuart Abercrombie, Sébastien
Racanière, et al. Targeted free energy estimation via learned mappings. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 153(14):144112, oct 2020.
[40] Peter Wirnsberger, George Papamakarios, Borja Ibarz, Sébastien Racanière, Andrew J Ballard,
et al. Normalizing flows for atomic solids. Machine Learning: Science and Technology,
3(2):025009, may 2022.
[41] Laurence Illing Midgley, Vincent Stimper, Javier Antoran, Emile Mathieu, Bernhard Schölkopf,
et al. SE(3) equivariant augmented coupling flows. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[42] Leon Klein, Andreas Krämer, and Frank Noe. Equivariant flow matching. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[43] Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, et al. Diffusion models:
A comprehensive survey of methods and applications. ACM Comput. Surv., 56(4), 2023.
[44] Emiel Hoogeboom, Víctor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant
diffusion for molecule generation in 3D. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
8867–8887. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
[45] Guilherme G. P. Freitas Pires and Mário A. T. Figueiredo. Variational mixture of normalizing
flows. European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, 2020.
[46] David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for
statisticians. Journal of the American statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
[47] Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. NICE: non-linear independent components
estimation. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, Workshop
Track Proceedings, 2015.
[48] Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real NVP. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[49] Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural spline flows. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[50] Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2018.
[51] George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji
Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 22(1), jan 2021.
[52] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 22(1):79 – 86, 1951.
[53] Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant
graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[54] Haggai Maron, Ethan Fetaya, Nimrod Segol, and Yaron Lipman. On the universality of invariant
networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 4363–4371. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
[55] Derek Lim, Joshua Robinson, Stefanie Jegelka, Yaron Lipman, and Haggai Maron. Expressive
sign equivariant networks for spectral geometric learning. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Physics
for Machine Learning, 2023.
[56] Michele Caselle, Elia Cellini, Alessandro Nada, and Marco Panero. Stochastic normalizing
flows as non-equilibrium transformations. JHEP, 07:015, 2022.
[57] Mathis Gerdes, Pim de Haan, Corrado Rainone, Roberto Bondesan, and Miranda C. N. Cheng.
Learning lattice quantum field theories with equivariant continuous flows. SciPost Phys., 15:238,
2023.
[58] John Schulman, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, and Pieter Abbeel. Gradient estimation
using stochastic computation graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28,
abs/1506.05254, 2015.
[59] Laurence Illing Midgley, Vincent Stimper, Gregor N. C. Simm, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Flow annealed importance sampling bootstrap, 2023.
[60] Kim A. Nicoli, Christopher J. Anders, Lena Funcke, Karl Jansen, Shinichi Nakajima, et al.
NeuLat: a toolbox for neural samplers in lattice field theories. PoS, LATTICE2023:286, 2024.
[61] Janik Kreit. Sesamo: Official implementation. Zenodo, 2026.
[62] Ryan Abbott, Denis Boyda, Daniel C Hackett, Gurtej Kanwar, Fernando Romero-López,
Phiala E Shanahan, and Julian M Urban. Progress in normalizing flows for 4d gauge theories.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00263, 2025.
[63] Andrea Bulgarelli, Elia Cellini, Karl Jansen, Stefan Kühn, Alessandro Nada, Shinichi Nakajima,
Kim A. Nicoli, and Marco Panero. Flow-based sampling for entanglement entropy and the
machine learning of defects. Phys. Rev. Lett., 134:151601, Apr 2025.
[64] Miranda CN Cheng and Niki Stratikopoulou. Lecture notes on normalizing flows for lattice
quantum field theories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18126, 2025.
[65] Hagen Kleinert and Verena Schulte-Frohlinde. Critical Properties of Phi4-Theories. WORLD
SCIENTIFIC, 2001.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
[66] Lorenz Vaitl, Kim Andrea Nicoli, Shinichi Nakajima, and Pan Kessel. Path-gradient estimators
for continuous normalizing flows. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 21945–
21959. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
[67] Alex Matthews, Michael Arbel, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Arnaud Doucet. Continual
repeated annealed flow transport Monte Carlo.
In Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 15196–15219. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
[68] Lorenz Vaitl, Ludwig Winkler, Lorenz Richter, and Pan Kessel. Fast and unified path gradi-
ent estimators for normalizing flows. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
[69] Edward Witten. Phases of n = 2 theories in two dimensions. Nuclear Physics B, 403(1):159–222,
1993.
[70] Daniel P. Arovas, Erez Berg, Steven A. Kivelson, and Srinivas Raghu. The hubbard model.
Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics, 13(1):239–274, March 2022.
[71] Thomas Luu and Timo A. Lähde. Quantum monte carlo calculations for carbon nanotubes.
Phys. Rev. B, 93:155106, Apr 2016.
[72] Kim A. Nicoli, Christopher J. Anders, Tobias Hartung, Karl Jansen, Pan Kessel, et al. Detecting
and mitigating mode-collapse for flow-based sampling of lattice field theories. Phys. Rev. D,
108:114501, dec 2023.
[73] Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural spline flows.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[74] Jan-Lukas Wynen, Evan Berkowitz, Christopher Körber, Timo A. Lähde, and Thomas Luu.
Avoiding ergodicity problems in lattice discretizations of the hubbard model. Phys. Rev. B,
100:075141, Aug 2019.
[75] Michael E. Peskin and Daniel V. Schroeder. An introduction to quantum field theory. Frontiers
in Physics, 1995.
[76] Daniel Naegels. An introduction to goldstone boson physics and to the coset construction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.14504, 2021.
[77] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
PSEUDOCODE
To offer an intuitive overview of our proposed method, we include a pseudocode example in Alg. 1.
Algorithm 1 Training loop of SESaMo
1: Initialize flow gθ with parameters θ
2: Initialize stochastic modulation Su with parameters b
3: for iteration = 1 to N do
4:
Sample z(1:B) from q0 and evaluate ln q0
 z(1:B)
5:
Obtain ˜x(1:B) and ln
det ∂gθ
∂z
 from flow
 z(1:B)
6:
Compute regularization Λ(˜x)
7:
Sample u(1:B) from pS,b and evaluate ln pS,b(u(1:B))
8:
Obtain x(1:B) and ln
det ∂Su
∂gθ
 from stochastic modulation Su(1:B)
 x(1:B)
9:
Compute unnormalized target probability f
 x(1:B)
10:
Compute log probability ln qθ
 x(1:B)
11:
Compute loss f
KL(qθ || p)
 x(1:B)
12:
Update parameters θ, b according to the REINFORCE estimator
13: end for
B
INTUITIVE COMPARISON OF CANONICALIZATION AND STOCHASTIC
MODULATION
In the main text, two approaches for effectively incorporating symmetries into generative models
such as NFs were introduced: canonicalization in Sec. 2.3.2 and Symmetry-Enforcing Stochastic
Modulation (SESaMo) in Sec. 3.1. In this section, we summarize the differences between these
approaches on a more intuitive level. To help the reader familiarize with the underlying ideas, we
provide an illustration for both SESaMo (top row) and canonicalization (bottom row) in Fig. 3,
showing an example target distribution and corresponding prior. In Fig. 3, the goal is to sample from
a toy target density p that exhibits three modes, visually represented by the three red triangles on the
left of Fig. 3. Both approaches start from a Gaussian prior density q0, represented by a circle.
In the case of SESaMo (top row), a random sample z ∼q0 is transformed by an NF, i.e., a parametric
map gθ, such that the probability mass of the prior density is shifted and transformed to cover one of
the modes of the target density (depicted as the triangle with a solid black line), which lies within
the canonical cell Ω(dashed black line), while the other symmetric modes (triangles with a dotted
black line) remain uncovered. The transformed density is denoted as eqθ. At this stage, the model
has captured only one mode of the target density. Subsequently, SESaMo employs the stochastic
modulation ST,u to redistribute the probability mass towards the other modes of the target density,
resulting in the final variational probability distribution qθ. This distribution (visualized by the three
triangles) approximates the target density p.
The canonicalization approach, depicted in the bottom row of Fig. 3, also starts with a prior Gaussian
distribution q0. Samples drawn from the prior distribution are transformed such that any sample
z ∼q0 is mapped to the canonical cell Ω(dashed black line), resulting in the density qzc (solid black
line), while the other symmetric modes (dotted black line) remain uncovered. Subsequently, an NF
gθ learns a bijective map to transform these samples in the canonical space. Canonicalized samples,
denoted as exc, are then drawn from the resulting distribution eqθ, which is illustrated in Fig. 3 as
a triangle with a solid black line. Given that the resulting parametrized distribution eqθ is in the
canonical space, it needs to be transformed back to the input space. This is achieved by applying
the inverse of the initial transformation C−1
T,z to the samples exc, resulting in the final parametrized
probability distribution qθ. The support of qθ is visualized in the right-most plot of the bottom row
by three triangles that approximate the target density p.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
EQUIVARIANCE OF THE CANONICALIZATION METHOD
Let us consider a general symmetry transformation T under which some function ξ(·) : x ∈Rn →
ξ(x) ∈R is invariant, i.e., ξ(x) = ξ(Tx). A concrete example of such a function can be the action of
a physical system, such as Eqs. (21) and (22). A learnable map gθ : z ∈Ω→ez ∈eΩis equivariant
under T, and is thus denoted egθ, if it satisfies the following condition:
egθ(Tz) = Tegθ(z).
(23)
The canonicalization approach, introduced in Sec. 2.3.2, leverages a so-called canonical transforma-
tion CT,z : Rn →Ωto map samples from the input space into the canonical cell Ω, thereby making
the map egθ equivariant with respect to T. The equivariant map egθ thus reads
egθ(z) = C−1
T,z gθ(CT,zz),
(24)
where CT,z maps a sample z into the canonical cell Ω, gθ denotes a specific NF, and C−1
T,z maps the
canonicalized (and transformed) sample ez = gθ(CT,zz) back to the original input space.
In this section, we restrict ourselves to involutory symmetry transformations, i.e., T 2 = 1. Our
goal is thus to show that canonicalization fulfils the equivariant condition in Eq. (23). We define the
canonical transformation
CT,z : z 7→
z,
if z ∈Ω
Tz,
if Tz ∈Ω,
(25)
with the inverse transformation
C−1
T,z : x 7→
x,
if z ∈Ω
Tx,
if Tz ∈Ω.
(26)
It is crucial to note that the inverse transformation C−1
T,z still depends on the sample z to which the
canonical transformation CT,z was initially applied, i.e., the information about the initial sample z is
implicitly stored in the transformation. One way to check if the map Eq. (24) is really equivariant
under the transformation T is to sequentially apply the transformation T and then CT,z to the input z,
CT,T z : Tz 7→
Tz,
if Tz ∈Ω
TTz,
if TTz ∈Ω=
Tz,
if Tz ∈Ω
z,
if z ∈Ω
.
(27)
Note that the involutory property TT = 1 has been used here.4 It follows that the transformations
CT,T z and CT,z are equivalent,
CT,T z Tz = CT,z z ,
(28)
while the inverse transformation C−1
T,T z reads
C−1
T,T z : x 7→
x,
if Tz ∈Ω
Tx,
if z ∈Ω
.
(29)
Additionally, one can compute TC−1
T,z,
TC−1
T,z : x 7→
Tx,
if z ∈Ω
TTx,
if Tz ∈Ω=
Tx,
if z ∈Ω
x,
if Tz ∈Ω
(30)
and verify that indeed
C−1
T,T zx = TC−1
T,zx.
(31)
Leveraging the identities in Eqs. (28) and (31), one can finally show that the overall map egθ is
equivariant with respect to the transformation T,
egθ(Tz) = C−1
T,T z gθ(CT,T z Tz) = TC−1
T,z gθ(CT,z z) = Tgθ(z),
(32)
which proves the initial equivariance condition in Eq. (23).
4Note that while the subscript T, z means that the forward canonical transformation is applied to the input z,
the subscript T, Tz means that the transformation is applied to the transformed input Tz.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
−π
0
π
0
A
Sample x
Λ(x)
B = 1
B = 2
B = 10
Figure 6: Example of a penalty term with λ(x) = |x| −π. The penalty term is zero for x ∈[−π, π]
and approaches A as x →±∞. The parameter B controls the scaling of the penalty gradient.
An essential part of the canonicalization is that the map gθ must not move the canonicalized sample
CT,zz outside the canonical cell, i.e., into Rn \ Ω. This requirement arises because if the map gθ
maps a sample outside of the canonical cell Ω—that is, if gθ(CT,z z) /∈Ω— then it is possible for
two distinct inputs z1 ̸= z2 with z1, z2 ∈Rn to be mapped to the same output via canonicalization
and transformation: gθ(z1) = gθ(z2). This leads to a loss of injectivity and, consequently, the
transformation gθ is no longer bijective. This poses a problem, as NFs require the map gθ to be
bijective in order to perform density estimation via Eq. (2). As described in Sec. 2.3.3, this constraint
can be numerically enforced using a penalty term Λ : x ∈Rn →Λ(x) ∈R, which is zero for x ∈Ω
and greater than zero for x /∈Ω. Furthermore, it is essential that the gradient ∂zΛ(gθ(z)) points
towards the canonical cell Ω. This ensures that if the NF pushes a sample ez = gθ(CT,z z) outside
of Ω, the gradient of Λ acts to pull it back into the cell. Further details on the penalty term and the
enforcement of bijectivity are provided in Sec. 2.3.3 and further elaborated in App. D.
D
PENALTY TERM FOR THE KL DIVERGENCE
In Eq. (10) from Sec. 2.3.3, we introduced a penalty term that is necessary to numerically enforce the
bijectivity required for the NF to serve as a valid transport map between probability densities. In this
section, we further elaborate on this penalty term and provide an example in Fig. 6.
Crucially, the penalty term Λ(x) and the associated penalty function λ(x) are necessary for ensuring
that the NF gθ does not map samples outside of the canonical cell Ω. For convenience, we recall the
penalty term,
Λ(x) = A · σ(B · λ(x)) · Θ(λ(x)) ,
(33)
where the set {A, B} denotes all hyperparameters, while σ(·) and Θ(·) refer to the sigmoid and the
Heaviside theta functions, respectively.
Fig. 6 shows an example for a penalty term for the canonical cell5 Ω= {x ∈R : |x| ≤π}. The
function λ(x) = |x| −π is chosen so that it becomes zero at the boundary |x| = π and positive
outside the canonical cell, i.e., for |x| > π. Correspondingly, the penalty term Λ(x) is zero for all
x ∈[−π, π] and smoothly approaches the value A as x →±∞. The parameter B controls the
scaling of the gradient of the penalty term.
E
GENERALIZATION OF SESAMO
E.1
ZM STOCHASTIC MODULATION
The stochastic modulation for the Z2 symmetry introduced in Sec. 3.1 can be generalized to a ZM
symmetry. The transformation Su randomly rotates a two-dimensional vector x ≡(x1, x2)T ∈R2
5Note that the example is in one-dimensional space R but can be straightforwardly generalized.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
0.5
1
Sample x
Probability
q0
qs
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
0.5
1
Sample x
Probability
q0
qs
Figure 7: Prior Gaussian distribution q0 with mean µ = 2 and standard deviation σ = 1. The
transformation Su, implementing the Z2 symmetry, randomly flips the sign of a sample xi ∼q0
with a probability determined by the breaking parameter b. When b = ln 0.5 (left), the resulting
distribution qs (yellow) is symmetric around zero, with both modes carrying equal probability mass.
When b = ln 0.25 (right), according to Eq. (38), the sign flip occurs with probability pS,b = 0.25,
leading to asymmetric modes at µ = ±2 that carry 25% and 75% of the total probability mass,
respectively.
b
pS,b(u = 0)
pS,b(u = 1)
0
0
1
ln 0.5
1/2
1/2
−∞
1
0
Table 2: Probability pS,b of not flipping (u = 0) and flipping (u = 1) the sign of the input x for
examples of the breaking parameter b, including the even case and the edge cases.
about the origin by an angle of 2πu/M, i.e.,
Su : x →

cos 2πu
M
−sin 2πu
M
sin 2πu
M
cos 2πu
M

x
with
u ∼Udisc(0, M) ,
(34)
where u ∼Udisc(0, M) is a discrete uniform random variable taking values in the set {0, 1, 2, . . . , M−
1}. The modulation probability is therefore given by pS = 1/M. To ensure the bijectivity of the
transformation Su, the penalty term eΛ is added to the KL divergence in Eq. (10), where
eΛ(x) = Λ[λ−(x)] + Λ[λ+(x)] ,
(35)
and the bijectivity function is expressed as
λ±(x) = −tan (π/M) x1 ±
x2
(1 + tan(π/M))2 .
(36)
The canonical cell defined by this penalty term corresponds to a sector of angular width 2π/M
centered around the x1-axis, with boundaries at angles ±π/M. The bijectivity function then measures
the distance of a sample to the border of the canonical cell. For more details on the penalty term, we
refer back to Sec. 2.3.3.
E.2
BROKEN Z2 STOCHASTIC MODULATION
In the main text, the exact Z2 symmetry was considered to illustrate how canonicalization and
SESaMo transform the base density. A Z2 symmetry is called exact when both modes (as shown
in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) carry equal probability mass. In the following, we extend this to a more general
case where the probability mass is unevenly distributed across the modes.
It is important to note that under these conditions, the canonicalization approach faces challenges.
Specifically, it is no longer sufficient to learn a single mode and evenly distribute the probability mass
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
among the others. In contrast, SESaMo, owing to its greater flexibility, can effectively handle this
asymmetry. To accommodate such cases, a learnable breaking parameter b ∈R−is introduced to
account for the imbalance in probability mass between the modes. When b →0, the sign of x is
always flipped, whereas in the limit b →−∞, the sign is never flipped. The transformation Su for a
broken Z2 symmetry therefore yields
Su : x →

x
if u = 0
−x
if u = 1
with
u ∼B(eb)
and
b ∈R−,
(37)
where B(eb) denotes a Bernoulli distribution. Note that when b = ln 0.5, the transformation reduces
to the symmetric Z2 case, where each mode is selected with equal probability. Tab. 2 shows the
modulation probability pS,b for the even case and the edge cases of the breaking parameter b discussed
above. For an arbitrary breaking parameter b, the modulation probability pS,b is given by
pS,b =
1 −eb
if u = 0
eb
if u = 1 ,
(38)
where u ∼B(eb). The corresponding bijectivity constraint, used in the penalty term Λ introduced
in Eq. (10), reads
λ(x) = −
N
X
i=1
xi ,
(39)
where the sum is taken over of all components of the vector x ∈RN. The breaking parameter
b is used in the exponential to ensure numerically stable simulations, which becomes particularly
important in the limits pS,b →0 and pS,b →1.
Fig. 7 (left) shows a one-dimensional Gaussian distribution q0 (blue), centered at x = 2 with standard
deviation σ = 1. Applying the stochastic modulation Su corresponding to the Z2 symmetry, with
the breaking parameter b = ln 0.5, yields a new distribution qs (yellow) that is symmetric around
zero. In this case, the probability mass is equally distributed across both modes. When the breaking
parameter b ̸= ln 0.5, the stochastic modulation accounts for the imbalance between the modes,
resulting in unequal probability masses in the transformed density qs. Fig. 7 (right) shows an example
for b = ln 0.25, where the mode at x < 0 carries less mass than the one at x > 0.
Numerically, a so-called breaking ratio can be estimated by counting the number of samples in each
mode of the distribution:
ˆR = N+ −N−
N+ + N−
= 1 −2eb ,
(40)
where N+ and N−denote the number of samples in the positive and negative modes of qs, respectively.
As an example, the experiments for the Hubbard model presented in the main text feature a broken Z4
symmetry, composed of an exact Z2 and a broken Z2 symmetry. SESaMo is able to learn this broken
Z4 symmetry by combining an exact and a broken Z2 transformation, i.e., effectively modulating the
sign of one of two field components.
E.3
BROKEN (Z2)Nx STOCHASTIC MODULATION
In the main text, we presented results for the Hubbard model for both small and large spatial lattice
extents, i.e., Nx = 2 and Nx = 18. The Hubbard models exhibits a combination of Nx distinct
Z2 symmetries, forming a (Z2)Nx symmetry. In terms of the stochastic modulation, we introduce
breaking parameters b ∈Rn with n ≡2Nx. The stochastic variable u is drawn from a categorical
distribution Cat(b) with log-odds b and u = 0, 1, . . . , 2Nx −1. The canonical cell is defined as
Ω= {x ∈RNx×Nt | P
t xit > 0 ∀i = 0, 1, . . . , Nx −1} and the stochastic modulation is given
by
Su : x →



















( 1, . . . ,
1,
1,
1)T ⊙x
if u = 0
( 1, . . . ,
1,
1, −1)T ⊙x
if u = 1
( 1, . . . ,
1, −1,
1)T ⊙x
if u = 2
( 1, . . . ,
1, −1, −1)T ⊙x
if u = 3
...
(−1, . . . , −1, −1, −1)T ⊙x
if u = 2Nx −1 ,
with
u ∼Cat(b) ,
(41)
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where ⊙denotes component-wise multiplication. This formulation ensures that x can be transformed
to one of the 2Nx orthans.
We can combine this broken symmetry with the exact Z2 symmetry present in the system, resulting
in an effective broken (Z2)Nx−1⊗exact Z2 symmetry. For Nx = 2, this reduces to a broken Z4
symmetry.
F
STOCHASTIC MODULATION FOR CONTINUOUS SYMMETRIES
In Sec. 3.1, the stochastic modulation Su was introduced for discrete symmetries, where Su has a
finite number of possible outcomes, each selected according to the modulation probability pS,b. This
approach is well-suited for discrete symmetries such as sign-flip or ZM symmetries. However, it is
not applicable to continuous symmetries—such as rotational or translational symmetries—where the
transformation space is uncountably infinite. In these cases, a modified formulation of stochastic
modulation is required to account for the continuous nature of the symmetry group.
The continuous stochastic modulation proceeds as follows: first, draw a sample u from a distribution
qu(u), which can be the uniform distribution U(0, 1). Then, apply a trainable map hb : [0, 1) →[0, 1)
with parameters b to obtain hb(u). This output parametrizes a continuous transformation Rhb(u), such
as a rotation matrix where the rotation angle is determined by hb(u). The stochastic transformation is
thus given by
Su : x →Rhb(u)x .
(42)
The modulation probability, which enters the density transformation in Eq. (15), follows from the
change-of-variable formula of the transformation Rhb(u) and can be expressed as
pS,b(u) = qu(u) ·
det
 
∂R−1
hb(u)
∂u
! ,
(43)
where qu(u) is the probability density of u and the determinant captures the local volume change
under the inverse transformation R−1
hb(u).
F.1
BROKEN AND EXACT U(1) STOCHASTIC MODULATION
In Sec. 4.2, the complex ϕ4 scalar field theory is introduced, in which the action f[x] (as defined in
Eq. (21)) remains invariant under a U(1) transformation of the form
Rφ = e2πiφ,
(44)
where the angle φ lies in the interval [0, 1). If a term αRe[x] is added to the action f[x], this U(1)
symmetry is broken, meaning that the Boltzmann-like density p(x) = exp (−f[x]) /Z becomes
dependent on the angle φ. This angular dependence can be captured within the stochastic modulation
framework by introducing a trainable map φ ≡hb(u). In particular, a spline flow (73) is used for this
purpose. The modulation probability in Eq. (43) then simplifies to
pS,b(u) = 1
2π
det
∂hb(u)
∂u

−1
,
(45)
where the chain rule is used to compute ∂R−1
hb(u)/∂u in Eq. (43), as well as the fact that
det
 
∂R−1
hb(u)
∂hb
! = 1
2π .
(46)
This is given because the rotation Rφ = e2πiφ in Eq. (44) corresponds to a full angular cycle over the
interval [0, 1), scaling the Jacobian by the full rotation angle 2π. Meanwhile, we used qu = 1 since u
is sampled from a uniform distribution on [0, 1), which has a constant density of one.
The sample x must be completely real before applying the stochastic modulation. This means that
a prior sample z = z1 + iz2, where z1, z2 ∈RN, must satisfy z2 = 0, i.e., it lies on the real axis,
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
and is transformed by an NF gθ : RN →RN. After applying the stochastic modulation Rhb(u), the
sample x becomes complex-valued, given by
x = e2πihb(u)gθ(z1) .
(47)
Note that by omitting the spline flow hb and using h ≡1, an exact U(1) symmetry can be enforced
instead of a broken one. Furthermore, this approach can similarly be used to enforce a broken or
exact rotational SO(2) symmetry.
G
TECHNICAL DETAILS OF THE PHYSICAL THEORIES
In this section, we discuss some fundamental aspects of the complex ϕ4 theory and the Hubbard
model that are relevant to our study.
G.1
THE COMPLEX ϕ4 SCALAR FIELD THEORY IN TWO DIMENSIONS
In recent years, the ϕ4 theory has become a popular benchmark for generative models in the machine
learning community (66; 67; 68). Originally developed as a physical model, it describes interacting
particles with integer spin. On a finite lattice with points j ∈V , the theory is specified by the action
ef[φ] =
X
j∈V

a2
2
2
X
ˆµ=1
 φj+aˆµ −φj
2
a2
+ m2
0
2 φ2
j + g0
4! φ4
j

,
(48)
where φj denotes the field value at site j. The first term inside the brackets corresponds to the kinetic
term, the second is the mass term governed by the bare mass m0, and the quartic φ4 term describes
the interaction, weighted by the bare coupling strength g0. Using the more standard redefinitions
(similarly adopted by Nicoli et al. (14))
φ = (2κ)1/2 x ,
(am0)2 = 1 −2λ
κ
−4 ,
a2g0 = 6λ
κ2 ,
(49)
we rewrite the action in the form presented in the main text:
f[x] =
X
j∈V

−2κ
2
X
ˆµ=1
(xjxj+ˆµ) + (1 −2λ)x2
j + λx4
j + αRe[xj]

.
(50)
Here, λ is known as the coupling parameter, while κ is the hopping parameter. Additionally, we
added a term αRe[xj] to progressively break the U(1) symmetry of the ϕ4 theory as the parameter α
increases. Such a symmetry-breaking term also arises in quantum field theories with non-degenerate
particle flavor masses, providing a physically motivated example.
G.2
THE HUBBARD MODEL IN TWO DIMENSIONS
The Hubbard model is a fundamental model in condensed matter physics that describes how electrons
interact on a fixed lattice of ions (70). By neglecting lattice vibrations and other atomic excitations, it
captures the essential physics of electrons hopping between valence orbitals and interacting through
their electric charge. This is further illustrated in Fig. 8. We describe the system in the so-called spin
basis, where the degrees of freedom correspond to spin-up and spin-down electrons. Other basis
choices exist but are not considered here.
The action of the system is given by (71)
f[x] = 1
2eU
X
j,k∈V
x2
jk −log det M [x] −log det M[−x] ,
(51)
where eU denotes the on-site Coulomb-like interaction strength, x are auxiliary bosonic fields, and the
subscripts j, k label the spatial and temporal lattice sites in the lattice volume V , respectively. Since
we do not consider a temporal extent throughout this manuscript, i.e. Nt = 1, we have dropped the
index k in Sec. 4.2 for brevity. Lastly, the fermion matrix M is defined as
M [x]j′k′,jk = δj′,kδj′,k −[eh]j′,keϕjkBk′δk′,k+1 .
(52)
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
eU
˜κ
Figure 8: Illustration of a lattice described by the Hubbard model. Blue and red circles represent
spin-up and spin-down electrons, respectively. The hopping term ˜κ allows electrons to move between
neighbouring lattice sites, while the on-site Coulomb interaction eU penalizes the presence of two
electrons with opposite spins at the same site.
Here, h = ˜κδ⟨j′,j⟩is the hopping matrix, where ˜κ is the hopping amplitude and δ⟨j′,j⟩enforces
hopping only between nearest neighbours j′, j on the lattice, and Bt is a factor implementing
periodic (anti-periodic) boundary conditions in the temporal direction for Nt = 1 (Nt > 1). The
action in Eq. (51) consists of two main contributions: the Gaussian term, which encodes the on-site
interaction, and the fermionic term, represented by the product of fermion matrices, which captures
the electron hopping dynamics across the lattice.
The Boltzmann-like density of the Hubbard model features widely separated modes, which can lead
to ergodicity problems and biased estimates of observables when using Monte Carlo-based sampling
methods such as Hybrid Monte Carlo (HMC) (74). NFs have demonstrated the ability to overcome
these challenges, particularly when they incorporate prior knowledge of the system’s symmetries (38).
H
ADDITIONAL NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present additional experiments for the Gaussian mixture model, the Hubbard
model, and the ϕ4 theory.
H.1
GAUSSIAN MIXTURE
The Gaussian mixture model introduced in Sec. 4 exhibits a multi-modal density, where locating all
modes is poses a significant challenge for RealNVP. This issue is mitigated by applying canonical-
ization and further improved with SESaMo, which achieves higher accuracy. Fig. 9 (left) shows the
ESS as a function of GPU training time in minutes. The solid lines and shaded regions indicate the
mean and standard deviation over ten models trained with different seeds. Both canonicalization and
SESaMo lead to faster convergence compared to RealNVP, which suffers from strong fluctuations
due to frequent mode collapse.
H.2
THE HUBBARD MODEL IN TWO DIMENSIONS
In Fig. 9 (right), the ESS is shown as a function of the GPU training time for the Hubbard model.
The solid lines and shaded regions indicate the mean and standard deviation over ten models trained
with different seeds. SESaMo not only achieves higher accuracy than both canonicalization and
RealNVP, but also converges faster than RealNVP. The canonicalization method fails to capture the
unequal probability masses across the modes, as illustrated in Fig. 5, while RealNVP suffers from
mode-dropping. In contrast, SESaMo successfully identifies all four modes and accurately predicts
their relative probabilities.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
3
4
5
GPU minutes
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
ESS
SESaMo (ours)
Canonicalization
RealNVP
(a) Gaussian mixture
0
1
2
3
4
5
GPU minutes
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
ESS
SESaMo (ours)
Canonicalization
RealNVP
(b) Hubbard model
Figure 9: ESS as a function of the GPU training time (minutes) for the Gaussian mixture (left) and
the Hubbard model (right). Solid lines represent the mean and shaded areas indicate the standard
deviation across ten models trained with different seeds. The results show that SESaMo achieves a
higher ESS compared to both canonicalization and RealNVP.
The effect of the broken Z2 symmetry becomes more pronounced as the inverse temperature β
increases. To investigate this behaviour, we train SESaMo and canonicalization models for values of
β ∈[1, 4], as shown in Fig. 10 (left). SESaMo consistently achieves high accuracy across all values
of β, while the canonicalization method exhibits significantly lower accuracy. This demonstrates that
SESaMo successfully learns the broken Z2 symmetry.
To further verify whether the probability is predicted correctly, we compare against the ground truth.
In Fig. 10 (right), the breaking ratio R from Eq. (40) is shown, where N± can be computed analytically
by integrating the probability distribution p(x) for a volume V = 2 × 1, i.e., x = (x1, x2) ∈R2.
The probability distribution6 is known up to a constant factor and given by
p(x) ∝h(x)h(−x)e−
x2
1+x2
2
Uβ
,
(53)
where
h(x) = cosh
x1 + x2
2

+ cosh
x1 −x2
2

cosh (˜κ) .
(54)
The theoretical prediction of the breaking ratio R matches perfectly with the expression R = 1 −2eb
obtained from the learned breaking parameter b.
H.3
THE REAL ϕ4 SCALAR FIELD THEORY IN TWO DIMENSIONS
In Sec. 4.2 and G.1, we introduced the complex ϕ4 scalar field theory in two dimensions. In its
general form, this theory consists of complex-valued fields.
Most recent works in the context of generative models (see, e.g., (13; 14)), however, have focused on
real scalar fields. Under this assumption, the ϕ4 theory belongs to the same universality class as the
Ising model and serves as an instructive toy model for exploring spontaneous symmetry breaking and
the Higgs mechanism (65). Assuming real scalar fields, the action in Eq. (21) simplifies to
f[x] =
X
j∈V

−2κ
2
X
ˆµ=1
(xjxj+ˆµ) + (1 −2λ)x2
j + λx4
j + αxj

,
(55)
with x ∈Rn. This form of the action corresponds to the one studied in Ref. (14; 72), up to the
addition of a symmetry-breaking factor αx. The coefficient α introduces an exponential suppression
of the probability with respect to the field x, thereby explicitly breaking the Z2 symmetry when
α > 0. In this context, the symmetry-breaking parameter b introduced in App. E can be learned such
6Note that this distribution is exact for V = 2 × 1. For larger volumes, it becomes exact only in the
strong-coupling limit U →∞while keeping β fixed.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Inverse temperature 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ESS
SESAMo (ours)
Canonicalization
(a) ESS as a function of the inverse temperature β.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Inverse temperature 
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Breaking ratio R
Analytical
SESAMo (ours)
(b) R as a function of the inverse temperature β.
Figure 10: Left: ESS for different values of the inverse temperature β. The blue and yellow
markers correspond to canonicalization and SESaMo, respectively. Means and standard deviations
are computed by averaging over three independently trained models (for each method) using three
different random seeds. Right: Breaking ratio R as a function of β. The analytical curve (yellow)
is obtained by integrating the analytically derived probability weight (see Eq. (79) in Ref. (74)).
The numerical estimate from Eq. (40), computed using a trained SESaMo model, agrees with the
analytical result within error bars. The uncertainties—often too small to be visible at the scale of the
plot—are estimated by averaging over three independently trained models with different seeds.
(a) Magnetization for broken Z2 (α = 0.001).
(b) Magnetization for unbroken Z2 (α = 0).
Figure 11: Histograms of the magnetization for real ϕ4 scalar field theory for a broken Z2 symmetry
(left, α = 0.001) and an exact Z2 symmetry (right, α = 0). Samples for the histograms are drawn
from two SESaMo models trained for the corresponding values of the breaking factor α.
that SESaMo redistributes the probability mass of the learned probability in accordance with the
asymmetry of the target distribution. We train SESaMo using the REINFORCE estimator of the KL
divergence discussed in Sec. 3.2. Additional hyperparameters and experimental details are provided
in App. I. Unless stated otherwise, all experiments in this setting are conducted on lattices of size
16 × 8, with action parameters fixed to κ = 0.3 and λ = 0.022.
Since the theory now consists of scalar real fields in two dimensions, it enters the so-called broken
phase for couplings {κ, λ} = {≥0.3, 0.022}. This phase is characterized by a bimodal probability
density with the centers of the modes located at the vacuum expectation values (VEVs) (72) of the
theory. When α = 0, both modes are identical, and the resulting distribution is symmetric. In this
case, both SESaMo and canonicalization are able to accurately learn the target distribution, achieving
high ESS without mode collapse (72). In the following, we compare the performance of SESaMo
and canonicalization in the case α > 0, where the Z2 symmetry of the double-well potential is
explicitly broken. To study this scenario, we trained different models using both approaches for
increasing values of α. The results are shown in Fig. 12 (left), which displays the ESS obtained
from models trained for a ϕ4-theory defined on a lattice of size V = 16 × 8 for various values of α.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Breaking factor 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ESS
SESaMo (ours)
Canonicalization
(a) ESS as a function of the breaking factor α.
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Breaking factor 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Breaking ratio R
Analytical
SESaMo (ours)
(b) R(α) as a function of the breaking factor α.
Figure 12: Left: ESS for different values of the breaking factor α. The blue and yellow markers
refer to canonicalization and SESaMo, respectively. Mean and standard deviations are computed by
averaging three models (for both approaches) trained with three different seeds. Right: Breaking ratio
R for different values α. The analytical (yellow) curve is obtained by plotting Eq. (58) as a function
of α. The numerical estimate in Eq. (40), obtained with a trained SESaMo model, is compatible with
the analytical result within errors. The uncertainties (sometimes too small to be visible in the scale of
the plot) are estimated by averaging three models trained with three different seeds.
Yellow and blue markers indicate results from SESaMo and canonicalization, respectively. Error bars
represent standard deviations computed from three independently trained models with different seeds.
Crucially, while the performance of SESaMo and canonicalization is comparable at α = 0, the ESS
of canonicalization drops to zero as α increases, and the potential becomes increasingly asymmetric.
In contrast, SESaMo maintains a stable ESS across the entire range of α, thanks to the stochastic
modulation enabled by the learned symmetry-breaking parameter.
Interestingly, this analysis can be made fully quantitative. The distribution of the magnetization for
the ϕ4 theory (see Fig. 11) yields a Gaussian distribution with two modes located at the VEVs= ±µ,
and is modulated by the symmetry-breaking factor α,
˜f(x) = A

e−(x−µ)2
2σ2
+ e−(x+µ)2
2σ2

· e−αV x,
(56)
where V = 16 × 8 is the volume of the lattice. The parameters {A, σ, µ} can be inferred from a
numerical fit of the histogram at α = 0 (see Fig. 11b), yielding
A = 0.499(2),
µ = 2.126(3),
σ = 0.629(3).
These parameters fully characterize the distribution defined in in Eq. (55). To quantify the effect of
symmetry breaking, we define N+(α) and N−(α) as the integrated probability mass over the right
and left modes, respectively:
N−(α) =
Z 0
−∞
dx ˜fα(x)
and
N+(α) =
Z ∞
0
dx ˜fα(x).
(57)
We then define the breaking ratio R as the relative imbalance between the two modes N+ and N−.
Using standard Gaussian integrals, this ratio can be computed analytically, resulting in
R(α) ≡N+(α) −N−(α)
N+(α) + N−(α) = 1 −e−V αµ [1 + erf (τ−(α))] + eV αµ [1 + erf (τ+(α))]
2 cosh(V αµ)
(58)
where τ±(α) are defined by
τ±(α) = σ
√
2

V α ± µ
σ2

.
(59)
The analytical result from Eq. (58) can be compared to the numerical estimate from Eq. (40). Fig. 10
(right) shows both the analytical prediction and the numerical estimate for the ratio R(α), for breaking
factors α ∈[0, 0.01]. The theoretical value in Eq. (58) and the numerical estimate in Eq. (40), for
different α, are represented with a solid (black) line and (blue) markers, respectively. For α = 0, the
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) α = 0
(b) α = 0.005
Figure 13: Continuous Symmetries: Density plot for real and imaginary components of the complex-
valued fields of complex ϕ4 scalar field theory, as introduced in Sec. 4, and sampled from trained
generative models, i.e., RealNVP and SESaMo. The models have been trained to sample from the
target density in Eq. (21) for lattices of volume V = 8×8 and coupling values {κ, λ} = {0.3, 0.022}.
The models are trained until convergence and the density plots are made by drawing 5 M samples.
The left and right plots refer to continuos U(1) symmetries in the unbroken (α = 0) and broken
(α = 0.005) case, respectively. Note that canonicalization is not shown as that approach is not
capable of handling continuos symmetries.
0
50
100
150
200
GPU minutes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ESS
SESaMo (ours)
RealNVP
(a) α = 0
0
50
100
150
200
GPU minutes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ESS
SESaMo (ours)
RealNVP
(b) α = 0.005
Figure 14: ESS as a function of the GPU training time (minutes) for the ϕ4 theory experiments
(see Fig. 13). The solid line and the shadows represent the mean and the standard deviations of ten
models trained with different seeds. The curve shows the substantially faster convergence of SESaMo
compared to naive RealNVP. Again, canonicalization is not shown as it cannot straightforwardly
incorporate continuos symmetries into the model.
estimated ration from the model is zero, suggesting that the fact the Z2 symmetry is not broken has
been correctly learned by SESaMo. By increasing α the ratio R converges to -1, which corresponds
to a fully broken Z2 symmetry i.e., that is, the probability for x > 0 is zero. Crucially, SESaMo is
able to always learn the correct breaking parameter, hence estimating the correct breaking ratio R
for a broken Z2-symmetric action.
With this simple example, we conclude that SESaMo is capable of incorporating symmetries inside
a flow-based generative model even when those are broken. One could foresee the power of this
approach in incorporating other types of broken symmetries, such as the chiral symmetry breaking in
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) (75). The QCD Lagrangian with two flavors, i.e., up and down
quarks, has a broken chiral symmetry due to the different masses of the up and down quarks. Results
for a toy model of such scenario were presented in the main text (see Tab. 1) and we further elaborate
on them in App. H.4 below.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Experiment
NC
NL
NN
Activation
NB
LR
Steps
µ
Var
GMM
6
4
40
ReLU (Tanh7)
8 k
5 × 10−4
10 k
0
1 (208)
Complex ϕ4
6
4
100
ReLU
8 k
5 × 10−4
400 k
0
1
Hubbard 2 × 1
6
4
40
ReLU (Tanh8)
8 k
5 × 10−4
6 k
0
18
Hubbard 18 × 100
10
4
100
ReLU (Tanh8)
8 k
5 × 10−4
20 k
0
0.18
Table 3: Hyperparameters for the Gaussian mixture model (GMM), the complex ϕ4 theory and the
Hubbard model. Shown are the number of couplings NC, number of layers NL, number of neurons
per layer NN, activation function, batch size NB, learning rate (LR), training steps / epochs, and the
mean µ and variance of the prior Gaussian distribution.
H.4
THE COMPLEX ϕ4 SCALAR THEORY IN TWO DIMENSIONS
In light of these considerations, in the main text (see Tab. 1) we tested how SESaMo is capable of deal-
ing with continuous (broken and unbroken) symmetries, and we showed a remarkable outperformance
compared to a naive RealNVP model. Furthermore, in App. F we discussed the details of SESaMo
when dealing with continuos symmetries. In this section we complement the results from the main
text with some further insights. First, Fig. 13 shows the density of the real and imaginary components
of the complex fields x ∈C summed across the lattice volume, i.e., Re[˜x] = P
i∈V Re[˜xi] and
Im[˜x] = P
i∈V Im[˜xi]. Fig. 13a shows a ring-shaped potential projected on the complex plane
stemming from the spontaneous symmetry breaking of an exact U(1) symmetry in the ϕ4 theory,
which leads to the emergence of Goldstone Bosons (see (76) and Fig. 1 therein). When the U(1)
symmetry itself is broken (α = 0.005), the probability density around the ring is no more evenly
distributed, as it is visualized in the density learned by SESaMo in Fig. 13b. The reader should note
that crucially, in the setting of continuous symmetries, only naive RealNVP and SESaMo can be
applied. Indeed, the canonicalization approach could not straightforwardly be applied.
Fig. 13 demonstrates the greater capability of SESaMo to incorporate exact and broken continuous
symmetries to enhance the model training and convergence. Moreover, this is further confirmed by the
speed of convergence to a relatively high ESS as a function of training time, as shown in Fig. 14. After
only seven minutes of training (one a single A100 NVIDIA GPU), the ESS achieved by SESaMo
already surpasses 60% for both α = 0 and α = 0.005. In contrast, RealNVP, lacking the inductive
bias induced by stochastic modulation, struggles to learn meaningful of the target density. The low
ESS reflects this failure in learning the target probability density, as also shown in the RealNVP plots
from Fig. 13.
I
DETAILS OF NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present details of the numerical simulations and the hyperparameters used in
the main paper. All NFs are trained on a single A100 NVIDIA GPU, using floating precision. For
the Hubbard model, however, double precision is used to ensure numerically stable estimation of
the fermion determinant. The Adam optimizer (77) is employed with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4.
Additionally, a learning rate scheduler is used: if the standard deviation of the loss has not changed
over the last 2000 epochs, the learning rate is multiplied by a factor of 0.92. The learning rate is
bounded from below at 1 × 10−6. As discussed in Sec. 3.2, the gradients are estimated with the
REINFORCE algorithm for all experiments with SESaMo. For the VMoNF method, the number of
NFs is chosen accordingly to the number of symmetry sectors, i.e., four in the Hubbard case and
eight for the Gaussian Mixture Model. For the ϕ4 theory we chose eight NFs as there are no clear
symmetry sectors for the U(1) symmetry. The remaining experiment-specific hyperparameters are
summarized in Tab. 3. For FAB, the hyperparameters are chosen similarly, while for the Hubbard
18 × 100 system they are reduced to enable training on a single GPU. The number of training steps is
chosen to match the training time of the other architectures.
7For VMoNF it was used Tanh, due to numerical instabilities.
8This variance was only used for the RealNVP and VMoNF models to alleviate mode-dropping.
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL USAGE
This work was partly supported by large language models. The usage contains polishing previously
written text, discovering related work and assisting coding.
29