--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MOD-ADAPTER:
TUNING-FREE
AND VERSATILE
MULTI-CONCEPT PERSONALIZATION VIA MODULA-
TION ADAPTER
Weizhi Zhong1∗, Huan Yang2, Zheng Liu1, Huiguo He5, Zijian He1,
Xuesong Niu2, Di Zhang2, Guanbin Li1,3,4†
1School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2Kolors Team, Kuaishou Technology
3Shenzhen Loop Area Institute, Shenzhen, China
4Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
5South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
A scene with color tone
A scene with color tone
A scene with color tone
A scene with color tone
A dog and a wallet made with surface 
under the light in cave
A dog and a wallet made with surface 
under the light in cave
 A dog and a handbag made with 
surface on a sandy beach
 A dog and a handbag made with 
surface on a sandy beach
Input Concepts
pose
light
style
color 
tone
color 
tone
scene
Input Concepts
A rabbit with pose 
under the light.
c
A rabbit with pose 
under the light.
c
light
Input Concepts
cat
Input Concepts
surface
surface
Input Concepts
surface
surface
in the forest, a cat and a flower vase 
made with surface
in the forest, a cat and a flower vase 
made with surface
A flower vase with surface under light 
in cave
A flower vase with surface under light 
in cave
c
A rabbit with pose 
in image style.
c
A rabbit with pose 
in image style.
surface
surface
light
light
dog
dog
Figure 1: Results of our multi-concept personalized image generation method. Our method
enables customizing both object and abstract concepts (e.g., pose, light, surface) without test-time
fine-tuning. The colored words in the prompt below image indicate concepts to be personalized.
ABSTRACT
Personalized text-to-image generation aims to synthesize images of user-provided
concepts in diverse contexts. Despite recent progress in multi-concept person-
alization, most are limited to object concepts and struggle to customize abstract
concepts (e.g., pose, lighting). Some methods have begun exploring multi-concept
personalization supporting abstract concepts, but they require test-time fine-tuning
for each new concept, which is time-consuming and prone to overfitting on limited
training images. In this work, we propose a novel tuning-free method for multi-
concept personalization that can effectively customize both object and abstract
concepts without test-time fine-tuning. Our method builds upon the modulation
mechanism in pre-trained Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) model, leveraging the
localized and semantically meaningful properties of the modulation space. Specif-
ically, we propose a novel module, Mod-Adapter, to predict concept-specific
modulation direction for the modulation process of concept-related text tokens. It
introduces vision-language cross-attention for extracting concept visual features,
and Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layers that adaptively map the concept features into
the modulation space. Furthermore, to mitigate the training difficulty caused by the
large gap between the concept image space and the modulation space, we introduce
a VLM-guided pre-training strategy that leverages the strong image understanding
∗Work done while interning at Kuaishou Technology.
†Corresponding author.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
capabilities of vision-language models to provide semantic supervision signals. For
a comprehensive comparison, we extend a standard benchmark by incorporating ab-
stract concepts. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in multi-concept
personalization, supported by quantitative, qualitative, and human evaluations.
Project Page: https://weizhi-zhong.github.io/Mod-Adapter.
1
INTRODUCTION
Personalized text-to-image generation aims to synthesize images of the concepts specified by user-
provided images in diverse contexts. Recently, this technique has attracted increasing research
attention due to its broad applications, such as poster design and storytelling. However, existing
personalized generation methods primarily focus on object concepts (e.g., common objects and
animals) and struggle to personalize non-object/abstract concepts (e.g., pose and lighting), limiting
their wider applicability. Recently, TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025) proposes a multi-concept
personalization framework supporting both object and abstract concepts. However, its concept-
specific test-time fine-tuning paradigm requires fine-tuning for each new concept image at test time,
which is time-consuming and tends to overfit on the single training image, leading to suboptimal
results. In this work, we take the first step toward a tuning-free framework enabling versatile
multi-concept personalization for both objects and abstract concepts as shown in Fig.1.
Existing tuning-free personalized generation methods (Sun et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Huang
et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2024) often face two challenges when customizing abstract concepts. First,
these methods failed to decouple the object concept and abstract concept from the input image due to
the lack of an effective mechanism for extracting abstract features. As a result, they tend to directly
replicate the object into the generated image. For example, when personalizing persons’ pose concept,
the generated person often closely resembles the one in the input concept image, rather than merely
reflecting the pose features. This compromises the alignment between the generated image and the
input prompt. Second, the features of abstract concepts are easily influenced by textual features
or other concept features during generation, hindering the accurate preservation of the customized
concept. This issue arises because these methods either concatenate concept image features with text
features, or fuse them through additive cross-attention layers(Ye et al., 2023), resulting in limited
localized control over the generated content.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel tuning-free framework for personalizing multiple
concepts (both objects and abstract concepts) by leveraging the localized and semantically meaningful
properties of the modulation space in DiTs. Specifically, we design a novel module, Mod-Adapter, to
predict modulation directions for customized concepts. The directions are further integrated into the
modulation process of concept-related textual tokens (e.g., "surface"), facilitating disentangled and
localized control over the generated content. To effectively extract the target concept features from the
input image, the Mod-Adapter introduces vision-language cross-attention layers that utilize the CLIP
model’s alignment capability between image and textual features. Besides, for accurately mapping
the extracted concept visual features into the direction of DiT modulation space, we introduce a
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) mechanism within Mod-Adapter, where each expert is responsible for
handling concepts with similar mapping patterns. Furthermore, to mitigate the difficulty of training
Mod-Adapter from scratch due to the large gap between the concept image space and the DiT
modulation space, we propose a VLM-guided pre-training strategy for better initialization, which
leverages the strong image understanding capabilities of vision-language models to provide semantic
supervision signals. To summarize, our key contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel tuning-free and versatile multi-concept personalization generation method that
can effectively customize both object and abstract concepts, such as pose, lighting, and surface,
without requiring test-time fine-tuning for new concepts.
• We propose an innovative module, Mod-Adapter, to predict concept-specific personalized directions
within the modulation space in a novel tuning-free paradigm. Within Mod-Adapter, the designed
vision-language cross-attention extract concept visual features by leveraging the image-text align-
ment capability of CLIP, and the Mixture-of-Experts layers adaptively project these features into the
modulation space. In addition, we propose a novel pre-training strategy guided by a vision-language
model to facilitate training Mod-Adapter.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• We extend the commonly used benchmark by incorporating abstract concepts, resulting in a new
benchmark named DreamBench-Abs. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in multi-concept personalization generation on this benchmark, as
validated by quantitative and qualitative evaluations as well as user studies.
2
RELATED WORKS
In contrast to single-concept personalization works (Tan et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025) that can only
customize a single concept, our discussion centers on multi-concept personalization, which can be
further categorized into tuning-based and tuning-free methods.
Tuning-Based Multi-concept Personalization. Tuning-based multi-concept personalization ap-
proach (Choi et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025; Kong et al., 2024; Kwon & Ye, 2025; Gu et al., 2023; Dong
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025; Kumari et al., 2023) requires one or more reference images of each
concept to fine-tune the model before performing multi-concept personalization at test time. For
example, Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023) and P+ (Voynov et al., 2023) introduce personalized
text-to-image generation by learning a pseudo-word text embedding to represent each input concept.
MuDI (Jang et al., 2024) and ConceptGuard (Guo & Jin, 2025) propose solutions to mitigate the
concept confusion problem in multi-concept customization, using a form of data augmentation
and concept-binding prompts techniques, respectively. Recently, TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025)
proposed a disentangled multi-concept personalization method, which supports decoupling abstract
concepts beyond objects, such as lighting conditions and material surfaces, from images. It optimizes
a small MLP for each image to predict the modulation vector offsets for words in the image caption,
learning to disentangle concepts of the image. Despite these advancements, tuning-based methods
require test-time fine-tuning for unseen concepts, which is time-consuming and prone to overfitting
on limited training images, often leading to suboptimal results. Contrasting with TokenVerse, we
propose a novel tuning-free paradigm along with an innovative module, Mod-Adapter, and a novel
pretraining strategy guided by a VLM.
Tuning-Free Multi-concept Personalization. Many studies (Sun et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024; Wu
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025) have attempted to explore tuning-
free multi-concept personalized generation, which can generalize to unseen concepts without the need
for test-time fine-tuning. Among these, Subject-Diffusion (Ma et al., 2024) and FastComposer (Xiao
et al., 2024) integrate subject image features into the text embeddings of subject words. The
combined features are then incorporated into the diffusion model through cross-attention layers to
enable personalized generation for multiple subjects. Similarly, λ-ECLIPSE (Patel et al., 2024)
projects image-text interleaved features into the latent space of the image generation model using a
contrastive pre-training strategy. BLIP-Diffusion (Li et al., 2023a) follows a VLM BLIP-2 (Li et al.,
2023b) to pre-train an encoder that produces text-aligned object-type concept representations. In
contrast, our pre-training leverages the strong image understanding capabilities of a frozen VLM
to facilitate the alignment of concept image features with the DiT modulation space. Benefit
from the localized and semantically meaningful properties of the modulation space, our method
can effectively customize both object and abstract concepts. Emu2 (Sun et al., 2024) proposes a
generative autoregressive multimodal model for various multimodal tasks including multi-concept
customization. InstructImagen (Hu et al., 2024a) introduces multimodal instructions and employs
multimodal instruction tuning to adapt text-to-image models for customized image generation. MS-
Diffusion (Wang et al., 2025) proposes a layout-guided multi-subject personalization framework
equipped with a grounding resampler module and a multi-subject cross-attention mechanism. MIP-
Adapter (Huang et al., 2025) introduces a weighted-merge mechanism to alleviate the concept
confusion problem in multi-concept personalized generation. UniReal (Chen et al., 2025) proposes
a unified framework for various image generation tasks, including multi-subject personalization,
by learning real-world dynamics from large-scale video data. However, all existing tuning-free
multi-concept personalization methods primarily focus on personalizing object concepts, and struggle
to handle customization of abstract concepts. In this study, we propose a novel tuning-free framework
for multi-concept personalization that can effectively customize both object and abstract concepts.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed method. (a) During training, the proposed Mod-Adapter module
takes as input a concept image and its corresponding concept word, and predicts a concept-specific
modulation direction for each DiT block. The predicted directions are integrated into the modulation
(Mod) process of the concept-related text tokens in DiT. (b) Pre-training of the Mod-Adapter module.
The concept image is fed into a vision-language model (VLM) to obtain a detailed descriptive caption
of the target concept in the image, which is further encoded by a CLIP text encoder and mapped
by an MLP layer (M) into the DiT modulation space. The resulting feature provides the semantic
supervision signals for Mod-Adapter. (c) At inference, Mod-Adapter predicts a modulation direction
for each customized concept. These directions are integrated into the modulation process of their
corresponding text tokens to enable multi-concept customization.
3
METHOD
The overview of our proposed method is shown in Fig. 2. We propose a modulation space adapter
module, named Mod-Adapter, for versatile multi-concept customization generation, along with
a VLM-supervised adapter pretraining mechanism. In the following sections, we first introduce
preliminaries on token modulation in DiTs (Sec. 3.1), and then detail the design of the Mod-Adapter
module (Sec. 3.2) and the proposed pretraining strategy (Sec. 3.3).
3.1
PRELIMINARIES
Diffusion Transformers(DiTs) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) have recently emerged as a promising architec-
ture for diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), owing to the strong scalability of transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017). In text-to-image DiTs (Esser et al., 2024; Labs, 2024), text tokens and noisy image
tokens are jointly processed through N DiT blocks, each consisting of joint attention and feed-forward
layers, to predict the noise added to the image VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013) latent. In addition,
the diffusion timestep condition and a global representation of the text prompt are integrated into
the generation process via a token modulation mechanism before joint attention. In this work, we
build on FLUX (Labs, 2024), a state-of-the-art DiT-based text-to-image model, for multi-concept
personalization. Specifically, in each DiT block, all image and text tokens are modulated by a shared
conditioning vector y through Adaptive Layer Normalization (AdaLN) (Peebles & Xie, 2023). The
modulation vector y is computed by summing the diffusion timestep embedding temb and a projection
of the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) pooled prompt embedding, as follows:
y = Mt(temb) + M(CLIP(p)),
(1)
where p is the text prompt, Mt and M are two distinct MLP mapping layers. TokenVerse (Garibi et al.,
2025) demonstrates that modulating individual tokens differently enables localized manipulations
over the concept of interest during generation process. Specifically, instead of using the same
modulation vector for all tokens, the text tokens associated with the target concept are modulated
using adjusted modulation vectors:
y′ = y + s∆attribute,
(2)
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where s is a scale factor, the direction ∆attribute captures the personalized attributes of the concept in
the modulation space. The updated vectors y′ will induce localized effects on concept-related image
regions through the joint attention layers. Thanks to the semantically additive properties of CLIP
textual embedding, previous works (Baumann et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2024b; Garibi et al., 2025) have
shown that the semantic direction of an attribute can be estimated using contrastive prompts with and
without the specific attribute. Specifically, ∆attribute can be approximated as:
∆attribute ≈M(CLIP(p+)) −M(CLIP(p0)),
(3)
where p+ is a positive prompt with some attribute added (e.g., “transparent cyan-green glass surface”),
p0 is a neutral prompt without attribute (e.g., “surface”), i.e., the concept word itself. Token-
Verse (Garibi et al., 2025) proposes training a separate MLP for each image to predict personalized
directions ∆attribute for the concept in the image. However, it requires fine-tuning a model at test
time for each new concept image. In contrast, we propose a tuning-free method for multi-concept
customization that can generalize to unseen concepts without test-time fine-tuning, as detailed in the
following sections.
3.2
MODULATION SPACE ADAPTER
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), our proposed Mod-Adapter takes a concept image and its corresponding
concept word as input, and predicts a personalized direction ∆attribute in the modulation space. Since
FLUX (Labs, 2024) contains N DiT blocks, Mod-Adapter predicts a distinct modulation direction
∆i for each block to enhance the model’s expressiveness, forming the set {∆i | i = 1, . . . , N}.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), in the i-th DiT block, only ∆i will be added to the original modulation
vector. Inspired by the formulation in Eq. 3, Mod-Adapter first predicts the attribute feature of the
customized concept in the modulation space, denoted as F +
i . Then, the personalized modulation
directions {∆i | i = 1, . . . , N} are computed as follows:
∆i = F +
i −M(CLIP(p0))
(4)
To obtain attribute feature F +
i , the Mod-Adapter is designed with a vision-language cross-attention
mechanism and a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) component, as detailed below.
Vision Language Cross-Attention. The proposed Mod-Adapter fully exploits the cross-modal
alignment capability of the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) between image and text features.
Specifically, to extract the desired concept features from the input concept image, the corresponding
concept word p0 (e.g., “surface”) is first passed through the CLIP text encoder followed by the
MLP mapping layer M to obtain a neutral feature(i.e. M(CLIP(p0))). To generate a personalized
modulation direction for each of the N DiT blocks, the neutral feature is further projected by a
linear layer into N queries, denoted as Q1, . . . , QN. Sinusoidal positional embeddings are added
to these queries for distinguishing the direction of different DiT blocks. Meanwhile, we encode
the input concept image using the CLIP image encoder and project the fine-grained features from
the penultimate layer into key and value, denoted as K and V , respectively. Then, cross-attention
between the text and image features is computed using the following formula:
Attention (Qi, K, V ) = Softmax(QiK
√
d
)V,
(5)
where d is the dimension of key and i = 1, . . . , N.
Mixture of Experts. After extracting the concept visual feature via vision-language cross-attention,
the feature must be mapped into the modulation space of the pre-trained DiT model for effective
integration. A straightforward approach is to use an MLP layer for this mapping. However, we find
that this leads to suboptimal performance, possibly due to the fact that different types of concepts
exhibit distinct mapping patterns. This suggests that concepts with similar mapping patterns should
be handled by the same mapping function, while those with significantly different patterns should
be processed separately. Motivated by this intuition, we introduce a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)
mechanism to adaptively map various concept visual features into the modulation space, where each
expert corresponds to a distinct MLP mapping network. The core of the MoE lies in the routing
network, which is responsible for assigning different inputs to different experts. A common practice
is to use a learnable linear gating network to perform the routing. However, we find that this approach
tends to suffer from the well-known imbalanced expert utilization problem, where many experts
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
remain underused during training, even when using a load balancing loss (Shazeer et al., 2017). To
address this issue, we design a simple parameter-free routing mechanism based on the k-means
clustering algorithm. Specifically, we perform k-means clustering over the neutral features of all
concept words (i.e., M(CLIP(p0))) in the training dataset, with the number of clusters equal to the
number of experts. Each resulting cluster corresponds to concepts of certain categories, which are
assigned to a specific expert for processing.
Training and Inference. The training framework of Mod-Adapter is illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The
proposed Mod-Adapter is the only component that requires training, while the pre-trained DiT-based
text-to-image generation model is kept frozen. During training, only a single customized concept
condition is added to the modulation space, while at inference time, multiple concept conditions
can be added to the modulation of their corresponding concept tokens to enable multi-concept
personalization, as illustrated in Fig. 2(c). We train Mod-Adapter using the same diffusion objective
as the original DiT model (Labs, 2024). However, we find that training Mod-Adapter from scratch
with this objective alone is challenging, possibly due to the large gap between the modulation space
in DiT and the concept image space. To address this issue, we propose a VLM-supervised pretraining
mechanism for Mod-Adapter to obtain a better initialization, as described below.
3.3
MOD-ADAPTER PRE-TRAINING SUPERVISED BY VLM
Our proposed pre-training approach is illustrated in Fig. 2(b), and is inspired by the formulations in
Eq. 3 and Eq. 4 from the previous analysis. The attribute feature F +
i predicted by Mod-Adapter can be
coarsely supervised during pre-training by the modulation-space representation (i.e., M(CLIP(p+)))
of a positive prompt p+ describing the attribute of the concept in image. To obtain an accurate
positive prompt p+ of the input concept image, we leverage a pretrained vision-language model
(VLM) that already possesses strong image understanding capabilities. Specifically, the concept
image and a pre-defined system prompt are fed into the VLM, where the system prompt guides the
model to describe the detailed attributes of the target concept in the image, resulting in the output p+.
The positive prompt p+ is then encoded by the CLIP text encoder and mapped by the MLP layer M
into the modulation space. The resulting feature is used to supervise the Mod-Adapter’s output F +
i
during pre-training, with the MSE loss defined as:
Lpretrain = 1
N
N
X
i=1
F +
i −M(CLIP(p+))
2
2
(6)
During pre-training, only the objective Lpretrain is used, and the output of Mod-Adapter is not
integrated into the memory-intensive DiT model, which enables efficient and lightweight pretraining.
After pretraining, the Mod-Adapter is incorporated into the DiT model and trained further using only
the diffusion objective mentioned above.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS
Datasets. We train our model using the open-source MVImgNet object dataset (Yu et al., 2023),
the Animal Faces-HQ (AFHQ) dataset (Choi et al., 2020), and synthetic data generated by the
FLUX (Labs, 2024) model. MVImgNet contains multi-view images of real-world objects. We
select objects of 40 commonly seen categories from it and use a single-view image per object for
training. AFHQ is a high-quality animal face dataset containing common categories such as cats,
dogs, and wildlife. For abstract concepts, we synthesize training data using the FLUX model, which
has been demonstrated by recent works (Tan et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2025a) to be an effective diffusion
self-distillation strategy. The resulting abstract concept dataset covers a range of common categories,
including those used in TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025) (environment light, human pose, scene, and
surface), as well as our additional extensions of image style and color tone. In total, our final training
dataset contains 106,104 images paired with corresponding captions.
Implementation Details. We adopt the pre-trained FLUX.1-dev model as our DiT backbone
containing N = 57 blocks. The Mod-Adapter contains N ′ = 4 blocks and the number of experts
is set to 12 according to the ablation study. It is the only module that requires optimization during
training, with a total parameter count of just 1,667.77M. For more details, please see Appendix C.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: Quantitative comparison. CP and PF score evaluates concept preservation and image-text
alignment respectively. Their product CP·PF is a comprehensive evaluation score. CLIP-T evaluates
the image-text alignment. All scores range from 0 to 1. ↑: higher is better.
Methods
Multi-Concept
Single-Concept
CP↑
PF↑
CP·PF↑
CLIP-T↑
CP↑
PF↑
CP·PF↑
CLIP-T↑
Emu2 (Sun et al., 2024)
0.53
0.48
0.25
0.299
0.73
0.57
0.42
0.288
MIP-Adapter (Huang et al., 2025)
0.68
0.55
0.37
0.328
0.70
0.39
0.27
0.277
MS-Diffusion (Wang et al., 2025)
0.62
0.51
0.32
0.326
0.57
0.40
0.23
0.282
TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025)
0.56
0.56
0.31
0.316
0.58
0.66
0.38
0.312
Mod-Adapter(Ours)
0.70
0.89
0.62
0.330
0.61
0.89
0.54
0.315
Comparison Methods. We compare our method with state-of-the-art multi-subject personalization
approaches, including tuning-free methods Emu2 (Sun et al., 2024), MIP-Adapter (Huang et al.,
2025), and MS-Diffusion (Wang et al., 2025), as well as the tuning-based method TokenVerse (Garibi
et al., 2025). Since the training datasets used by MIP-Adapter and MS-Diffusion do not include
abstract concept data, we fine-tune their released model weights using our abstract concept data
to ensure a fair comparison. Emu2 has not released its training code, but its training data includes
common abstract concepts such as style and lighting.
Evaluation Benchmarks. Following prior work (Wang et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025; Sun et al.,
2024), we evaluate the performance of both single-concept and multi-concept personalization on the
DreamBench benchmark (Ruiz et al., 2023), which contains 30 object or animal concepts and 25
template prompts. In addition, we extend the DreamBench by incorporating 20 abstract concepts
for a more comprehensive evaluation, resulting in a new benchmark named DreamBench-Abs. For
multi-concept evaluation, we follow TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025) to construct 30 combinations
from all 50 concepts. None of the test images or prompts appear in our training set. Among all
methods, only TokenVerse, based on per-sample training, requires using the test images for training.
Metrics. We follow prior methods (Wang et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024; Garibi
et al., 2025) to evaluate both single-concept and multi-concept personalization from two perspectives:
the fidelity of the generated concepts (Concept Preservation) and the alignment between the generated
images and the textual prompt (Prompt Fidelity). As our task involves both object and abstract
concepts, we follow TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025) and adopt a multimodal LLM-based (OpenAI,
2024; Peng et al., 2025) scoring approach. For each generated image, the multimodal LLM outputs a
Concept Preservation (CP) and a Prompt Fidelity (PF) score, which evaluate concept preservation
and image-text alignment, respectively. Since there is often a trade-off between the two metrics, their
product (CP·PF) is also reported as a comprehensive score (Peng et al., 2025). Besides, we evaluate
image-text alignment by measuring the similarity between their CLIP embeddings (CLIP-T).
4.2
COMPARISONS
Quantitative Comparison. We report the quantitative comparison results in Tab. 1. In multi-concept
personalization, our method outperforms all previous approaches across all metrics. Specifically, it
achieves the highest CP·PF score of 0.62, demonstrating a substantial +67.6% improvement over the
second-best method, MIP-Adapter (0.37). While MIP-Adapter and MS-Diffusion achieve competitive
CP scores (0.68 and 0.62, respectively), their PF scores (0.55 and 0.51) are significantly lower
than ours (0.89). Consistent with observations from prior work, the CLIP-T metric is insensitive
to variations in image-text alignment, with all methods scoring around 0.3. In single-concept
personalization, our method still achieves significantly higher performance on the combined metric
CP·PF compared to all other methods. Although Emu2 and MIP-Adapter outperform us on the
CP metric, they perform significantly worse on both PF and CLIP-T, indicating that they sacrifice
prompt fidelity to achieve higher concept preservation. In addition, while Emu2 performs well in
single-concept personalization, its performance drops notably in the multi-concept setting.
Qualitative Comparison. Fig. 3 presents representative qualitative comparisons between our method
and other approaches. In the first row of single-concept personalization, our method successfully
generates a wallet with a brown leather surface consistent with the input concept image. In contrast,
MS-Diffusion, MIP-Adapter, and Emu2 fail to effectively disentangle the abstract concept ’brown
leather’ from the object (handbag). As a result, they simply replicate the original object in the
generated image, producing an undesired brown leather handbag instead of the desired wallet. This
observation aligns with their high CP scores but low PF scores in Tab. 1. In the multi-subject per-
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MIP-Adapter
Input Concepts
Prompt: a wallet made with surface
surface
surface
Prompt: in the road, a dog and a flower vase made with surface
Prompt: a purple T-shirt girl is sitting with a pose on a stage under a light
dog
light
pose
Prompt: a dog and a woman with a pose in image style
Image
style
dog
pose
TokenVerse
MS-Diffusion
Emu2
Ours
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison. The left dashed box shows input concept images. Colored words
in the prompt indicate concepts to be personalized, while underlined text highlights elements that
reflect differences in prompt alignment performance between methods.
Table 2: User study results. CP and PF respectively record the average scores given by volunteers
for concept preservation and image-text alignment. Scores range from 1 to 5. ↑: higher is better.
Methods
Multi-Concept
Single-Concept
CP↑
PF↑
CP↑
PF↑
Emu2 (Sun et al., 2024)
2.10
2.02
2.66
3.04
MIP-Adapter (Huang et al., 2025)
2.83
2.78
2.53
2.14
MS-Diffusion (Wang et al., 2025)
3.16
3.14
2.42
2.60
TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025)
3.35
3.48
3.43
2.87
Mod-Adapter(Ours)
4.29
4.40
4.49
4.60
sonalization setting, our method continues to demonstrate superior concept preservation and prompt
alignment performance, whereas Emu2 shows reduced effectiveness, often generating unnatural
concept combinations. MS-Diffusion and MIP-Adapter are still prone to "copy-paste" artifacts (e.g.,
the glass table in the second row and the man in the third row), which negatively affect prompt
alignment. Meanwhile, their concept preservation performance also declines. In both single- and
multi-concept personalization settings, tuning-based methods TokenVerse tend to overfit due to the
need for fine-tuning on each input concept image, which compromises both concept preservation and
prompt alignment. Its per-sample training paradigm only encourages the model to better reconstruct
the training images with the input of corresponding image captions, but it does not ensure good
performance on unseen test prompts in real-world scenarios. All these results demonstrate the superior
performance of our method in multi-concept personalized generation.
User Study. Following the evaluation setting of TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025), we conducted a user
study with 32 participants, asking them to rate each generated image in terms of concept preservation
(CP) and prompt fidelity (PF). Each participant evaluated five results per method on both single- and
multi-concept personalization settings, resulting in 4000 votes. The results are reported in Tab. 2.
Our method receives consistently higher user ratings than all compared methods in both CP and PF.
For more details about the user study, please see Appendix D.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4.3
ABLATION STUDY
Input concepts
Ours
w/o pre-training
w/o VL-attn
w/o MoE
w/o k-means
Prompt: a backpack made with surface
surface
surface
Prompt: in a cave, a dog and a handbag made with surface
Prompt: a dog and a cat on a green sofa
dog
cat
dog
Figure 4: Qualitative ablation results. The left dashed box shows input concept images. Eliminating
any proposed component degrades qualitative performance.
Table 3: Quantitative ablation results.
Methods
Multi-Concept
Single-Concept
CP↑
PF↑
CP·PF↑
CLIP-T↑
CP↑
PF↑
CP·PF↑
CLIP-T↑
w/o k-means routing
0.59
0.83
0.49
0.324
0.54
0.82
0.44
0.311
w/o MoE
0.52
0.68
0.35
0.313
0.51
0.82
0.42
0.311
w/o VL-attn
0.52
0.75
0.39
0.329
0.57
0.86
0.49
0.317
w/o pre-training
0.29
0.58
0.17
0.306
0.33
0.72
0.24
0.308
Mod-Adapter(Ours)
0.70
0.89
0.62
0.330
0.61
0.89
0.54
0.315
Mod-Adapter Pre-training. We design an ablation variant excluding the Mod-Adapter pre-training
strategy. Specifically, we train the Mod-Adapter from scratch using only the diffusion objective,
under the same training settings and for the same total number of steps (176K) as the full model. The
quantitative results of this variant are shown in the “w/o Pre-training” row of Tab. 3. Both CP and PF
scores drop significantly for both single-concept and multi-concept personalization. Furthermore,
as illustrated in the “w/o pre-training” column of Fig. 4, the generation quality degrades in terms of
both concept preservation and prompt fidelity compared to our full model. This degradation is due to
the large gap between the modulation space in DiT and the concept image space. In contrast, our
proposed VLM-supervised pre-training mechanism effectively mitigates this training difficulty by
leveraging the strong understanding capabilities of the VLM to provide an initialization.
Vision Language Cross-Attention. We design an ablation variant removing VL cross-attention from
the Mod-Adapter module. In this variant, the concept word is not used as input, and the VL-attention
is replaced with a standard cross-attention layer, where the queries are N learnable query tokens
following MS-Diffusion (Wang et al., 2025). As shown in the “w/o VL-atten” results in Tab. 3 and
Fig. 4, this variant shows slightly degraded performance in both concept preservation and prompt
fidelity in single-concept personalization. However, in the multi-concept setting, the performance
drop is more significant, possibly due to the learnable query mechanism’s inability to effectively
extract target concept features. As mentioned earlier, the CLIP-T metric is insensitive to variations
in prompt alignment; thus, the CLIP-T score of this variant remains comparable to, or even slightly
higher than that of our full model.
Mixture of Experts. We design an ablation variant by replacing the MoE layer with a single MLP,
while keeping the overall parameter count of the Mod-Adapter unchanged. As shown in the “w/o
MoE” results on Tab. 3 and Fig. 4, this variant performs worse than our full model in both concept
preservation and prompt fidelity. This is because a simple MLP is insufficient to accurately project
diverse concept features into the modulation space of the pre-trained DiT network. For more ablation
analysis on the number of experts, please refer to the Appendix F.
K-means MoE Routing. We design a variant following the common practice of using a learnable
linear gating network for routing. As shown in Tab. 3 and Fig. 4, compared to our full model, this
variant shows degraded performance in both concept preservation and prompt fidelity, but it still
performs better than the “w/o MoE” variant. This is because the learnable linear gating network tends
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
to result in the under-utilization of certain experts, which is equivalent to using fewer experts than
our full model. For more detailed analysis and the ablation on the clustering method, please refer to
the Appendix F.
5
CONCLUSION
We propose a novel tuning-free framework for versatile multi-concept personalization, capable of
customizing both object and abstract concepts without test-time fine-tuning. Our method contains a
novel module, Mod-Adapter, consisting of vision-language cross-attention layers for concept visual
feature extraction and Mixture-of-Experts layers for projecting features into the modulation space.
Additionally, we introduce an innovative VLM-guided pretraining strategy to facilitate Mod-Adapter
training. We conduct extensive experiments and demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our
proposed method. For the limitation discussion of our method, please refer to the Appendix A.
6
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is sponsored by CCF-Kuaishou Large Model Explorer Fund (No. CF-KuaiShou 2024007),
and is also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62322608), and
supported by Kuaishou Technology.
REFERENCES
Stefan Andreas Baumann, Felix Krause, Michael Neumayr, Nick Stracke, Melvin Sevi, Vincent Tao
Hu, and Björn Ommer. Continuous, Subject-Specific Attribute Control in T2I Models by Identify-
ing Semantic Directions. In CVPR, 2025.
Shengqu Cai, Eric Chan, Yunzhi Zhang, Leonidas Guibas, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon. Wetzstein.
Diffusion self-distillation for zero-shot customized image generation. In CVPR, 2025a.
Yinqi Cai, Jichang Li, Zhaolun Li, Weikai Chen, Rushi Lan, Xi Xie, Xiaonan Luo, and Guanbin
Li. Deepshield: Fortifying deepfake video detection with local and global forgery analysis. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 12524–12534,
2025b.
Xi Chen, Zhifei Zhang, He Zhang, Yuqian Zhou, Soo Ye Kim, Qing Liu, Yijun Li, Jianming Zhang,
Nanxuan Zhao, Yilin Wang, et al. UniReal: Universal image generation and editing via learning
real-world dynamics. In CVPR, 2025.
Yongjin Choi, Chanhun Park, and Seung Jun Baek. DynASyn: Multi-subject personalization enabling
dynamic action synthesis. In AAAI, volume 39, pp. 2564–2572, 2025.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. StarGAN v2: Diverse image synthesis
for multiple domains. In CVPR, pp. 8188–8197, 2020.
Ganggui Ding, Canyu Zhao, Wen Wang, Zhen Yang, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, and Chunhua Shen.
FreeCustom: Tuning-free customized image generation for multi-concept composition. In CVPR,
pp. 9089–9098, 2024.
Jiahua Dong, Wenqi Liang, Hongliu Li, Duzhen Zhang, Meng Cao, Henghui Ding, Salman H Khan,
and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. How to continually adapt text-to-image diffusion models for flexible
customization? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:130057–130083, 2024.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
high-resolution image synthesis. In ICML, 2024.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
textual inversion. In ICLR, 2023.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Daniel Garibi, Shahar Yadin, Roni Paiss, Omer Tov, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat, Tomer Michaeli, Inbar
Mosseri, and Tali Dekel. TokenVerse: Versatile multi-concept personalization in token modulation
space. ACM SIGGRAPH 2025, 2025.
Yuchao Gu, Xintao Wang, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yujun Shi, Yunpeng Chen, Zihan Fan, Wuyou Xiao,
Rui Zhao, Shuning Chang, Weijia Wu, et al. Mix-of-show: Decentralized low-rank adaptation for
multi-concept customization of diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:15890–15902, 2023.
Zinan Guo, Pengze Zhang, Yanze Wu, Chong Mou, Songtao Zhao, and Qian He. Musar: Exploring
multi-subject customization from single-subject dataset via attention routing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.02823, 2025.
Zirun Guo and Tao Jin. ConceptGuard: Continual personalized text-to-image generation with
forgetting and confusion mitigation. In CVPR, 2025.
Will Hawkins, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Deepfakes on demand: The rise of accessible
non-consensual deepfake image generators. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1602–1614, 2025.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS, 33:
6840–6851, 2020.
Hexiang Hu, Kelvin C.K. Chan, Yu-Chuan Su, Wenhu Chen, Yandong Li, Kihyuk Sohn, Yang Zhao,
Xue Ben, Boqing Gong, William Cohen, Ming-Wei Chang, and Xuhui Jia. Instruct-Imagen: Image
generation with multi-modal instruction. In CVPR, pp. 4754–4763, June 2024a.
Taihang Hu, Linxuan Li, Joost van de Weijer, Hongcheng Gao, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Jian Yang,
Ming-Ming Cheng, Kai Wang, and Yaxing Wang. Token merging for training-free semantic
binding in text-to-image synthesis. NeurIPS, 37:137646–137672, 2024b.
Qihan Huang, Siming Fu, Jinlong Liu, Hao Jiang, Yipeng Yu, and Jie Song. Resolving multi-condition
confusion for finetuning-free personalized image generation. In AAAI, volume 39, pp. 3707–3714,
2025.
Sangwon Jang, Jaehyeong Jo, Kimin Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Identity decoupling for multi-subject
personalization of text-to-image models. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Jiaxiu Jiang, Yabo Zhang, Kailai Feng, Xiaohe Wu, Wenbo Li, Renjing Pei, Fan Li, and Wangmeng
Zuo. Mcˆ 2: Multi-concept guidance for customized multi-concept generation. In Proceedings of
the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 2802–2812, 2025.
Jian Jin, Yu Zhenbo, Shen Yang, Zhenyong Fu, and Jian Yang. LatexBlend: Scaling multi-concept
customized generation with latent textual blending. In CVPR, 2025.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–
1312, 2013.
Zhe Kong, Yong Zhang, Tianyu Yang, Tao Wang, Kaihao Zhang, Bizhu Wu, Guanying Chen, Wei Liu,
and Wenhan Luo. OMG: Occlusion-friendly personalized multi-concept generation in diffusion
models. In ECCV, pp. 253–270. Springer, 2024.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
customization of text-to-image diffusion. In CVPR, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. TweedieMix: Improving multi-concept fusion for diffusion-based
image/video generation. In https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05591, 2025.
Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux, 2024.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for
controllable text-to-image generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:30146–30166, 2023a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023b.
Ming Li, Taojiannan Yang, Huafeng Kuang, Jie Wu, Zhaoning Wang, Xuefeng Xiao, and Chen Chen.
ControlNet++: Improving conditional controls with efficient consistency feedback: Project page:
liming-ai. github. io/controlnet_plus_plus. In ECCV, pp. 129–147. Springer, 2024.
Wenxue Li, Tian Ye, Xinyu Xiong, Jinbin Bai, Feilong Tang, Wenxuan Song, Zhaohu Xing, Lie Ju,
Guanbin Li, and Lei Zhu. Glasswizard: harvesting diffusion priors for glass surface detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 17848–17858,
2025.
Jian Ma, Junhao Liang, Chen Chen, and Haonan Lu. Subject-Diffusion: Open domain personalized
text-to-image generation without test-time fine-tuning. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference
Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan.
T2I-Adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
models. In AAAI, volume 38, pp. 4296–4304, 2024.
OpenAI. Introducing gpt-4o and more tools to chatgpt free users. 2024. URL https://openai.
com/index/gpt-4o-and-more-tools-to-chatgpt-free/.
Maitreya Patel, Sangmin Jung, Chitta Baral, and Yezhou Yang. λ-ECLIPSE: Multi-concept personal-
ized text-to-image diffusion models by leveraging clip latent space. TMLR, 2024.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In ICCV, pp.
4195–4205, 2023.
Yuang Peng, Yuxin Cui, Haomiao Tang, Zekun Qi, Runpei Dong, Jing Bai, Chunrui Han, Zheng
Ge, Xiangyu Zhang, and Shu-Tao Xia. DreamBench++: A human-aligned benchmark for person-
alized image generation. In ICLR, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
4GSOESJrk6.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In ICML, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, PMLR, 2021.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
DreamBooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
pp. 22500–22510, 2023.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
Qingyu Shi, Lu Qi, Jianzong Wu, Jinbin Bai, Jingbo Wang, Yunhai Tong, and Xiangtai Li. DreamRe-
lation: Bridging customization and relation generaion. In CVPR, 2025.
Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Xiaosong Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qiying Yu, Yueze Wang, Yongming Rao,
Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative multimodal models are in-context
learners. In CVPR, pp. 14398–14409, 2024.
Zhenxiong Tan, Songhua Liu, Xingyi Yang, Qiaochu Xue, and Xinchao Wang. OminiControl:
Minimal and universal control for diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15098, 2024.
Zhenxiong Tan, Songhua Liu, Xingyi Yang, Qiaochu Xue, and Xinchao Wang. Ominicontrol:
Minimal and universal control for diffusion transformer. 2025.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Qwen Team.
Qwen2.5-VL, January 2025.
URL https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/
qwen2.5-vl/.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 30, 2017.
Andrey Voynov, Qinghao Chu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Kfir Aberman. p+: Extended textual condition-
ing in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09522, 2023.
Xierui Wang, Siming Fu, Qihan Huang, Wanggui He, and Hao Jiang. MS-Diffusion: Multi-subject
zero-shot image personalization with layout guidance. In ICLR, 2025.
Shaojin Wu, Mengqi Huang, Wenxu Wu, Yufeng Cheng, Fei Ding, and Qian He. Less-to-more
generalization: Unlocking more controllability by in-context generation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 18682–18692, 2025.
Zhi-Fan Wu, Lianghua Huang, Wei Wang, Yanheng Wei, and Yu Liu. MultiGen: Zero-shot image
generation from multi-modal prompts. In ECCV, pp. 297–313. Springer, 2024.
Guangxuan Xiao, Tianwei Yin, William T Freeman, Frédo Durand, and Song Han. FastComposer:
Tuning-free multi-subject image generation with localized attention. IJCV, pp. 1–20, 2024.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. IP-Adapter: Text compatible image prompt
adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721, 2023.
Xianggang Yu, Mutian Xu, Yidan Zhang, Haolin Liu, Chongjie Ye, Yushuang Wu, Zizheng Yan,
Tianyou Liang, Guanying Chen, Shuguang Cui, and Xiaoguang Han. MVImgNet: A large-scale
dataset of multi-view images. In CVPR, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
diffusion models. In ICCV, pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Yuxuan Zhang, Yirui Yuan, Yiren Song, Haofan Wang, and Jiaming Liu. Easycontrol: Adding
efficient and flexible control for diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07027, 2025.
Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jianmin Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-
Yee K Wong. Uni-ControlNet: All-in-one control to text-to-image diffusion models. NeurIPS, 36:
11127–11150, 2023.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
A
LIMITATIONS DISCUSSION
First, similar to TokenVerse (Garibi et al., 2025), our method may fail when two customized concepts
have the same name in the prompt—for example, generating an image based on a prompt where the
word “dog” appears twice. Second, when personalizing more than three concepts simultaneously,
our method tends to deviate from the concept conditions. At the time of submission, our model was
trained only on single-concept data, which may be the primary cause for the performance drop in
multi-concept customization with an extreme number of concepts. Additionally, our framework relied
solely on the CLIP image encoder for image feature extraction, which captures high-level features
but tends to lose low-level object details. We present a potential solution: we synthesized training
data involving two concepts (abstract and object) using the FLUX model, and combined it with the
open-source MuSAR-Gen (Guo et al., 2025) multi-concept dataset, resulting in a total of 52,000
multi-concept samples for training. Furthermore, to mitigate the loss of low-level object details,
we concatenated the VAE latents of concept images with the noise latents as additional conditions.
We also introduced UnoPE (Wu et al., 2025) positional encoding to distinguish VAE latents from
multiple reference images and applied lightweight LoRA fine-tuning to the joint attention layers in
DiT. We present qualitative results for customizing 4 to 5 concepts in Figure 10. We leave addressing
these limitations as future work.
B
MORE RELATED WORKS
Adapter. Adapters offer an efficient paradigm for customized generation. Several adapter-based
methods (Zhang et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024;
2025) employ lightweight modules for task-specific adaptation while keeping the foundation model
weights frozen. For example, ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) proposed a trainable copy module of
its U-Net-encoder to incorporate spatial control conditions (e.g., edge maps). IP-adapter (Ye et al.,
2023) proposed a decoupled cross-attention module to enable the image prompt control. Based on
it, MIP-Adapter (Huang et al., 2025) further introduces a weighted-merge mechanism to alleviate
the subject confusion problem in multi-subject personalized generation. In this paper, we propose a
modulation space adapter module, Mod-Adapter, to predict concept-specific modulation directions
while keeping the parameters of the pre-trained DiT backbone frozen.
C
MORE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We use Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct (Team, 2025) as the vision-language model (VLM) for attribute
caption and image caption. We train the model using the AdamW (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer
with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 on 8x 80GB GPUs. Mod-Adapter is first pre-trained for 50K steps
with a batch size of 32 without being integrated into the DiT model, followed by an additional
126K steps of further training with a batch size of 1. Our method has the advantage of supporting
multi-concept personalization at inference time while training only on single-concept data, especially
given the difficulty of obtaining high-quality multi-concept training data. This ability stems from the
localized and composable nature of the DiT modulation space. The scale factor s in Eq. 2 is set to 1
during training and testing.
D
USER STUDY DETAILS
Fig. 5 shows the user study interface for evaluating single- (a) and multi-concept (b) personalization.
To assess concept preservation, participants were asked to rate the similarity between each generated
concept and the corresponding concept in the reference image. For multi-concept cases, each concept
was evaluated separately, and the final score was calculated by averaging the scores across all concepts.
Participants selected from five options, each corresponding to a score from 1 to 5: “Very inconsistent”
(1), “Somewhat inconsistent” (2), “Fair” (3), “Quite consistent” (4), and “Very consistent” (5). To
assess prompt fidelity, participants evaluated how well the content of the generated image matched
the given text prompt, using the same five-point scale.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Single-Concept
(b) Multi-Concept
Figure 5: Screenshot of our user study rating interface. (a) Single-concept personalization
evaluation. (b) Multi-concept personalization evaluation.
Table 4: More quantitative ablation results.
Methods
Multi-concept
single-concept
CP
PF
CP·PF
CLIP-T
CP
PF
CP·PF
CLIP-T
Ours (N_expert=1)
0.40
0.54
0.22
0.272
0.36
0.48
0.17
0.278
Ours (N_expert=4)
0.43
0.59
0.25
0.305
0.40
0.78
0.31
0.310
Ours (N_expert=8)
0.57
0.65
0.37
0.310
0.50
0.79
0.40
0.308
Ours (N_expert=12)
0.70
0.89
0.62
0.330
0.61
0.89
0.54
0.315
Hierarchical Clustering (N_expert=12)
0.72
0.88
0.63
0.331
0.62
0.87
0.54
0.313
E
BROADER IMPACTS
The development of the proposed versatile multi-concept personalization generation technique holds
potential for broad societal benefits, such as facilitating personalized image creation, storytelling,
poster design, and other creative applications. However, this technology may also raise concerns about
potential negative societal impacts, such as its misuse to generate misleading or deceptive content,
or enabling style-specific personalization that may infringe upon artists’ rights. These risks can be
mitigated through techniques such as watermarking generated images and developing robust deepfake
detection algorithms (e.g. (Cai et al., 2025b; Hawkins et al., 2025)) for content authentication.
F
MORE ABLATION ANALYSIS
The number of experts and the clustering method. In our MoE routing design, we suspect that
concepts within the same cluster may share similar mapping patterns and should therefore be handled
by the same expert. Based on this assumption, we set the number of clusters equal to the number of
experts, such that each expert is responsible for processing concepts of multiple categories within
one cluster. This design choice is empirically validated by our ablation study. Besides, we conducted
experiments to investigate the impact of the number of clusters/experts (N_experts) and the choice of
clustering method (k-means vs. hierarchical clustering). The results are shown in Tab.4. As observed,
increasing the number of experts (i.e., the number of clusters) leads to improved model performance.
We used 12 experts in our setup, the maximum that could be accommodated simultaneously within
the 80GB GPU memory constraint. To accommodate more experts, the CPU offloading technique can
be adopted at the cost of additional offloading overhead. Additionally, the choice between hierarchical
and k-means clustering has negligible impact on performance.
K-means MoE Routing. In the ablation study, we design a variant that employs a learnable linear
gating network for MoE routing. This variant exhibits suboptimal performance, possibly due to the
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 5: Licenses for released assets
Asset
License
FLUX.1 [dev]
Apache-2.0 license
Qwen2.5-VL
Apache-2.0 license
under-utilization of certain experts. We further analyze the expert utilization pattern in this section
and observe that several experts are underused, which is equivalent to using fewer experts than our
full model. We visualize the expert assignment patterns of the MoE layers in the 1st and 2nd blocks of
Mod-Adapter during training in Fig.6 (a) and Fig.6 (b), respectively. The training set contains 106,104
samples, and for each sample, Mod-Adapter predicts N = 57 modulation directions, resulting in
6,047,928 total inputs (106,104 × 57) to each MoE layer per training epoch. Each bar in Fig.6
indicates the percentage of inputs routed to each expert. As shown, Expert 7 (3.8%) and Expert
8 (4.1%) in the first Mod-Adapter block, as well as Expert 4 (1.1%) in the second block, receive
significantly fewer inputs during training. This may lead to slower training of these experts, which
in turn makes them less likely to be selected in subsequent iterations, resulting in their insufficient
utilization. In contrast, our parameter-free k-means-based routing mechanism pre-defines expert
assignments before training, based on k-means clustering over the neutral features of all concept
words in the training dataset, helping ensure sufficient utilization of all experts throughout the training
process as shown in Fig.6 (c).
Figure 6: Distribution of Expert Assignment. Each bar indicates the percentage of inputs routed to
each expert.
G
ADDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS
In this section, we present additional qualitative results of our method (see Fig. 7, 8, 9, 11 and
Fig. 12.)
H
LICENSES FOR RELEASED ASSETS
This work uses the listed projects in Tab. 5 released under their licenses. We strictly adhered to their
license requirements; the original projects’ copyright notices and license texts can be found in their
official repositories.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A tiger made with surface 
on a wood table 
A house made with 
surface in forest
A bridge made with 
surface over a muddy 
river
A car made with surface 
parked on a display stand 
The Eiffel Tower in image 
style
A wedding in image style
A sleepy mountain village 
in style
A classroom in style
A bridge over a river, 
image with a color tone
A car parked on a beach, 
image with a color tone
A picture of a castle 
on a mountain with a 
color tone
A TV and a sofa in a room, 
image with a color tone
style
A bolt of lightning with 
light
A bed in the room under 
light
The Eiffel Tower 
under a light.
A cave with a light
light
surface
color tone
Input Concept
Input Concept
Input Concept
Input Concept
Figure 7: More single-concept personalization results of our method. Colored words in the prompt
indicate concepts to be personalized; underlined text highlights elements reflecting prompt alignment.
dog
light
light
A dog is sitting 
in a cave under light
A dog and a ball 
made of light 
Input Concepts
pose
style
light
A boy with pose in image style
A boy with pose under light
Input Concepts
cat
surface
surface
Input Concepts
Input Concepts
A cat and a ball made with 
surface on the grass
A dog wearing sunglasses on the 
street
sunglasses 
light
dog
A cat sitting by a ball made with 
surface on the floor
A dog in a library with light
Figure 8: More multi-concept personalization results of our method. Colored words in the prompt
indicate concepts to be personalized; underlined text highlights elements reflecting prompt alignment.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A dog made with 
surface on a road.
A living room in 
style.
surface
Input Concept
A backpack made with 
surface on a bench.
surface
Input Concept
style
Input Concept
A sofa and a table 
under light.
a boy with pose on a 
blanket.
light
Input Concept
A living room image 
in color tone.
color tone
Input Concept
pose
Input Concept
A girl with pose on 
the beach.
A lion on the scene.
pose
Input Concept
A cat on the scene.
scene
Input Concept
scene
Input Concept
There is a toy on the 
scene.
A vase and a cup made 
with surface.
Input Concepts
A car on the scene.
Input Concepts
Input Concepts
scene
toy
scene
car
surface
vase
A nut on a box 
made with surface.
Input Concepts
surface
nut
By the sea, there is a toy 
and a boy with pose.
Input Concepts
pose
toy
A vase under light.
Input Concepts
light
vase
A hat made with surface and a 
teapot on the beach, near a dog.
Input Concepts
surface
teapot
dog
On a scene, there is a bag near 
a vase.
Input Concepts
scene
vase
bag
Figure 9: More qualitative examples of our method on abstract concept personalization. Colored
words in the prompt indicate concepts to be personalized, including abstract concepts and their
combinations with object concepts.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Input Concepts
On a scene, a plushie and a dog on 
a carpet made with surface
On a lake under light, a hat and 
a plushie on a boat.
On a cave under the light, there are 
a teapot, a plushie and a toy.
light
scene
surface
On the sea under light, there are a 
bowl, a plushie and a teapot on a boat
teapot
plushie
toy
plushie
Input Concepts
dog
plushie
Input Concepts
light
hat
boat
plushie
Input Concepts
boat
light
teapot
bowl
Input Concepts
bag
A bag, a hat, a toy, and a guitar on a 
sofa made with surface.
hat
guitar
toy
surface
Figure 10: The qualitative results of our method for customizing an extreme number of concepts
(4 to 5 concepts). Colored words in the prompt indicate concepts to be personalized.
A cat made with surface.
cat
surface
Input Concepts
A hat made with surface.
hat
surface
Input Concepts
Figure 11: Qualitative results of combining abstract concepts and concrete objects. Our method
effectively decouples abstract concepts and concrete objects and successfully recombines them.
Colored words in the prompt indicate concepts to be personalized.
In the weather, a teapot 
and a plushie by the lake.
In the weather, a teapot 
and a plushie on the road.
Surrounded by a fog, there is a 
plushie and a toy on the road. 
fog
fog
weather
weather
In front of a fog, a plushie and 
a toy on a wooden table.
teapot
plushie
toy
plushie
Input 
Concepts
Input 
Concepts
Figure 12: Qualitative results demonstrating the generalization of our method to concept
categories completely unseen during training. Colored words in the prompt indicate concepts to
be personalized.
19