--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
PLANNING WITH AN EMBODIED LEARNABLE MEMORY
Priyam Parashar*
Jacob Krantz*
Matthew Chang*
Kavit Shah
Xavier Puig†
Roozbeh Mottaghi†
ABSTRACT
We develop a novel memory representation for embodied planning models perform-
ing long-horizon mobile manipulation in dynamic, large-scale indoor environments.
Prior memory representations fall short in this setting, as they struggle with object
movements, suffer from computational deﬁciencies, and often depend on the heuris-
tic integration of multiple models. To overcome these limitations, we present the
Embodied Perception Memory (EPM), a learnable memory designed for embodied
planning. EPM is implemented as a uniﬁed Vision-Language Model (VLM) that
uses egocentric vision to maintain and update a textual environment representa-
tion. We further introduce two complementary methods for training planners to
leverage the EPM: an imitation strategy that uses human trajectories for natural
exploration and interaction, and a novel reinforcement learning approach, Dynamic
Difﬁculty-Aware Fine-Tuning (DDAFT), which improves planning performance
via difﬁculty-aware exploration. Our memory representation, when integrated with
our planning training methods, leads to signiﬁcant improvements on planning tasks,
showing up to a 55% increase in success rate on the PARTNR benchmark compared
to strong baselines. Also, our planning method outperforms these baselines even
when they have access to groundtruth perception.
1
INTRODUCTION
Imagine a human doing tasks in their home. Without even thinking, they can move towards the
cabinet where they last placed a clean mug and plate, bring them to the table, and prepare a coffee to
start the day. Our ability to perform these tasks effortlessly rely on an interplay between memory,
perception, and planning. Memory provides us with a mental map of the objects in the environment,
which we update based on our observations, and use to plan effectively. For robots to perform tasks in
indoor environments with such efﬁciency, we need to equip them with the same capabilities: perceive
surroundings, remember where objects are over long periods of time, and plan actions accordingly.
Developing an effective memory representation for embodied planning models that tackle long-
horizon tasks poses signiﬁcant challenges. The memory must not only capture the spatial conﬁgura-
tion, context and state of objects in the scene, but also update dynamically as agents explore or the
environment changes. Further, the memory must integrate with a planning system to provide context
that enables the agent to perform a task.
The current literature on memory representations for planning in embodied tasks has certain limi-
tations. A primary shortcoming of many existing approaches is their inability to effectively handle
dynamic environments (Gu et al., 2024a; Jatavallabhula et al., 2023), where objects are frequently
moved and changed by the robot or humans in the environment. Many of the existing approaches
encode the environment by storing the agent’s egocentric observations (Liu et al., 2024a; Yang et al.,
2025), or a featurized point-cloud of the scene (Jatavallabhula et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a), which
can be queried to retrieve relevant information. While multi-stage pipelines combining standalone
detection and segmentation models with planners have been effective, particularly in complex scenes
with small or rare objects, such representations often have high memory requirements and compu-
tational cost when querying large models multiple times for planning. Furthermore, formulating
precise queries can be challenging and impractical for the planner. As found in prior work (Chang
et al., 2024), naive feature matching with language queries fails to achieve both high precision and
* † Equal contribution. Work done at FAIR, Meta.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
EPM
Task: Bring the scissors, the phone and the 
credit card from the table to the counter
Entity.1: Coffee table
Entity.2: Scissors on Entity.1
Entity.3: Phone on Entity.1 
Add (0.3, 0.8): Scissors on Entity.1 
Add (0.6, 0.9): Phone on Entity.1  
Remove: Entity.4  
Updates
High-Level Planner
Action: Grab Object.2
Agent Observation
Figure 1: We present a memory representation for embodied planing in large-scale environments.
Our method includes Embodied Perception Memory (EPM), a VLM-based system that represents
the environment from egocentric observations. Our novel LLM-based planner trained with human
demonstrations and RL reason over EPM to plan agent actions.
recall. To address these challenges, we propose a novel memory representation that is adaptable,
efﬁcient, can handle dynamic environments, and easily interacts with task planners.
In particular, we introduce the Embodied Perception Memory (EPM), a novel form of learnable
external memory for planning in mobile manipulation tasks. EPM is a single Vision-Language Model
(VLM) trained to perform various operations—such as adding, removing, and updating informa-
tion—on scene representations derived from egocentric observations. This end-to-end approach
eliminates the need for heuristics and enables faster inference than approaches consisting of multiple
models. EPM encodes an object-centric representation of the environment, where each object is
characterized by 3D coordinates and a natural language description of the object’s state and context.
This naturally results in a textual representation of the scene, which can be used by LLM-based
planners that have demonstrated strong performance in planning tasks.
This representation enables the planner to access environment information directly, without the need
for explicit, task-based queries (in contrast to approaches that rely on such queries, e.g., Yang et al.
(2025)). Hence, the planner can focus only on generating actions to interact with the environment,
rather than issuing separate API calls to retrieve information. As a result, the planner can be improved
with robot interaction data where such queries may not be available. To leverage this, we introduce a
strategy to train the planning model on human demonstrations of mobile manipulation tasks, resulting
in improved exploration and task execution. Then, we develop a novel online RL-based approach that
leverages insights from LLM reasoning works (Shao et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2024)
to improve planning from online experience. Speciﬁcally, we propose Dynamic Difﬁculty-Aware
Fine-Tuning (DDAFT), which is a novel form of value-function-free RL for LLMs that explores the
planning space on difﬁcult instructions with online sampling. This induces a curriculum over the
training data, leading to sample efﬁcient policy improvement.
We evaluate EPM’s ability to track the environment in simulated and real-world egocentric interaction
datasets, showing that our approach can track the environment in both domains despite being trained
only in simulation. We also evaluate EPM together with our proposed planner in PARTNR (Chang
et al., 2024), a simulation benchmark measuring agents’ abilities to perform tasks speciﬁed by
language. Our results show signiﬁcant improvements over strong baselines such as Liu et al. (2024a)
and Chang et al. (2025), achieving absolute success rate gains of 55% and 12%, respectively, on
planning tasks. Additionally, we show that human demonstration training outperforms zero-shot
baselines even when zero-shot planners are provided groundtruth perception. Further, our DDAFT
approach improves performance across all settings, providing a recipe to enhance embodied planning.
In summary, our contributions are:
• We introduce the Embodied Perception Memory, a novel form of learnable memory for embodied
planning tasks that effectively handles dynamic environments as a single model, and can be
seamlessly integrated with LLM-based planners.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Method
Open
Vocabulary
Object
Relationships
Error
Correction
Dynamics
No Query
Single
Model
ConceptFusion (Jatavallabhula et al., 2023)
↭
ConceptGraphs (Gu et al., 2024a)
↭
↭
↭
3D-Mem (Yang et al., 2025)
↭
↭
↭
DynaMem (Liu et al., 2024a)
↭
↭
↭
↭
EPM (ours)
↭
↭
↭
↭
↭
↭
Table 1: Comparison to different memory representations. We compare EPM with other popular
embodied memory representations. Object Relationships: whether object-furniture relationships
are encoded. Dynamics: whether the representation allows for a changing environment. No Query:
whether the representation needs to be queried to retrieve information.
• We present a novel planning approach that leverages human demonstration data and DDAFT,
demonstrating signiﬁcant performance improvements over strong baselines.
2
RELATED WORK
Embodied Planning with LLMs and VLMs. A large body of work has studied LLMs as policies
for embodied agents, leveraging their strong capabilities in planning and common sense reasoning,
but also highlighting limitations in grounding them to an agent’s observations and actions (Ahn et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2023c; Zeng et al., 2022). To improve grounding, some methods integrate language
models with external modules, which are exposed to the LLMs as APIs to reason over the agent’s
observations and commands (Schick et al., 2023). These modules can consist of learned or hand-
designed low-level controllers (Wang et al., 2024; Driess et al., 2023), or perception models (Liu
et al., 2024a; Chang et al., 2025; Rana et al., 2023). DynaMem (Liu et al., 2024a) maintains a
point-cloud representation of the environment, which is queried by an LLM to obtain task-relevant
information. As a result, planning with such representations requires an LLM to generate both text
queries to extract information from the environment and high-level actions. Other approaches build
a text representation of the environment in the form of a scene graph, which is used by the LLM
for planning (Gu et al., 2024a; Rana et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2025). This separation decouples
planning from perception and interaction, but is sensitive to the representations of each module, and
errors which propagate throughout the system, resulting in planning failures (Chang et al., 2025;
Li et al., 2025). Additionally, maintaining multiple specialized modules introduces computational
overhead that increases overall system requirements. Furthermore, they struggle to model dynamic
scenes, requiring heuristic to track objects over time. More recently, multiple works have used VLMs
to predict agent actions directly from observations, either by predicting parameters for pre-deﬁned
robot skills (Nasiriany et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023b; 2024) or ﬁnetuning them to directly predict
low-level actions (Shi et al., 2025; Bjorck et al., 2025). These approaches ground actions directly into
visual observations, but are limited by VLMs’ memory constraints, and thus insufﬁcient for tasks
requiring long-horizon exploration in large environments. Our work is closer to the ﬁrst family of
approaches, but instead of relying on off-the-shelf models, we propose learnable a memory system
trained on embodied data, and propose an approach to allow LLM planners to effectively work with
noisy memory representations.
Spatio-Semantic Memory. There is a long history of research on spatio-semantic memory, i.e.
remembering the locations of elements of the scene jointly with semantic information about those
elements. Early works (Aydemir et al., 2013; Gupta et al., 2017) focus primarily on navigation and
are not designed to handle open vocabulary instructions. A common line of work uses a VLM such as
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or LSeg (Li et al., 2022) to produce language-aligned features for views
of the scene. These features are typically projected into 3D using a point cloud (Huang et al., 2023a;
Ha & Song, 2022; Liu et al., 2024a; Jatavallabhula et al., 2023), neural radiance ﬁeld (Kerr et al.,
2023; Qiu et al., 2024), or Gaussian splat (Ji et al., 2024; Shorinwa et al., 2024). While these methods
permit open-vocabulary queries over the scene, such features do not natively encode inter-entity
relationships making referential or contextual queries harder to address. To interface with a planning
system, these approaches rely on matching spatial feature vectors with some query (typically via
cosine similarity), querying a VLM on stored images (Yang et al., 2025), or store per-object features
or labels based on location information (Gu et al., 2024a; Maggio et al., 2024; Chang et al., 2024). In
contrast, EPM directly produces text representing entities and entity-relationships, allowing seamless
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
integration with an LLM planner. Further, all of these works struggle with object re-association and
correction of spurious objects, relying on heuristics or thresholds. Re-association and correction are
learned within EPM, avoiding these issues. Short-horizon planning over these representations may
be achieved by transforming the current scene to a goal image (Wang et al., 2023), or leveraging
a differentiable scene representation (Bolte et al., 2023). However, long-horizon planning with
contextual features is most commonly performed with a pre-trained LLM. This can be done by
ﬁnding locations via cosine similarity with queries produced from the LLM (Chen et al., 2023; Yan
et al., 2025), or explicitly building a text representation of the scene (Gu et al., 2024a; Koch et al.,
2024). EPM uses the latter approach, using the descriptions produced by the learned model directly
in the context of an LLM. In Table 1 we provide an overview of different memory representations.
Finally, several works build dynamic representations during simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) (Jiang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2018). Such representations
generally fail to meet the needs of embodied planning: e.g., object re-initialization instead of tracking,
limited vocabularies, and insufﬁcient interpretability. We expand this discussion in Appendix A.1.
3
THE EMBODIED PERCEPTION MEMORY (EPM)
We describe the memory component of our system which builds an environment representation from
ego-centric observations. We deﬁne the setting under which the memory operates and introduce the
EPM to build and maintain a dynamic representation of the environment.
3.1
PROBLEM SETTING
We aim to detect and track objects in the scene as the agent interacts with the environment. Formally,
let M t denote the environment representation at time t. We learn an update function f such that
M t = f(M t→1, ot, at), where ot, at are observations and actions. Dynamic objects are unknown and
can be moved as the agent executes the task. Below, we deﬁne the environment state, observations,
and actions.
VLM
at
Coordinates
RGB Image
Agent Obs.
M t→1
Environment 
State
M t
Updates
Entity.1 (x,y,z): coffee table
Entity 2 (x,y,z): sofa
Entity.3 (x,y,z): ball on E.1
Entity.4 (x,y,z): toy on E.2
Add: pot on Entity.1
Remove: Entity.4
ot
Agent Action
= Navigate[Entity.1]
Figure 2: Overview of the EPM.
Environment State. We represent the en-
vironment as a list of entities correspond-
ing to the furniture and objects. Entity at
index i is associated with a unique idi, a
3D coordinate ci →R3 of the approximate
centroid of the object or furniture, and a
natural language description di containing
information such as open-vocabulary name,
state or relationship with other entities.
Observations. At every timestep t, the
agent is given egocentric observations ot
from the environment: RGBD images, the
camera pose, and intrinsic parameters.
Actions. The agent takes high-level actions in the environment. Action a is a tuple (u, idv1 . . . idvn)
where u is a verb (e.g., Navigate, Pick, Place) and v1 . . . vn index into the entities of environment
state M. We use the same action space as Chang et al. (2025) (Details in Appendix A.2 and A.4).
3.2
TRACKING THE ENVIRONMENT STATE WITH THE EPM
Instead of generating a new environment state M t, the EPM outputs a set of discrete operations that
are combined with M t→1 and the agent’s egocentric observations to obtain M t. We consider four
operation types (we ﬁrst list the format of the operation, then describe the function):
• Add (<coords>):<description>: Adds a new entity to M t→1, with the natural language
description d = <description>. The entity coordinates c are derived by unprojecting the pixel
coordinates <coords> into the world frame.
• Update k (<coords>):<description>: Updates the entity with index j in M t→1 such
that idj = k, modifying its coordinates and description.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Remove k: Removes the entity at index j from M t→1 such that idj = k.
• No updates: Maintains the same memory state M t ↑M t→1.
The Add operation appends previously-unseen objects to the environment state. Update tracks
changes of a given object (for instance, if a cabinet was opened or an object was grabbed), and
enables correction of perception errors (e.g., correcting the category of a mislabeled object once it is
seen from a closer distance). Remove removes entities that have disappeared from the scene or were
previously misdetected. If there is no new information, the EPM outputs No updates. We train a
VLM to predict EPM updates. Given the RGB observation, textual environment state, robot action,
and agent’s pose, the model predicts a set of the above operations that update the memory.
Training. We generate a dataset of agent interactions on PARTNR (Chang et al., 2025), a simulation
benchmark requiring agents to explore and move objects in indoor environments. We initialize
M 0 with the static environment layout and furniture (e.g., cabinets and large tables). We obtain
this information directly from the simulator. Alternatively, we could leverage recent powerful
techniques to obtain geometric layouts using structure-from-motion techniques (Wang et al., 2025;
Tang et al., 2025), and furniture by systems that lift 3D reconstructions to static object instances, e.g.
EgoLifter (Gu et al., 2024b). We initialize EPM with M 0 and use heuristics to derive a sequence
of operations that update it over time using privileged information. This produces a dataset of
observations, actions, environment states, and update operations. Using this as supervision, we
ﬁnetune a LLaVa-OneVision-7b base model (Li et al., 2024) with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022).
4
PLANNING WITH AN EMBODIED MEMORY
We develop a planner that leverages EPM memory to perform mobile manipulation tasks speciﬁed in
natural language (e.g., tasks in Figure 1). We present the agent, its use of EPM, and two methods for
training the planner to achieve increased task performance and perception robustness.
4.1
ARCHITECTURE
We adopt a two-layer control architecture following Chang et al. (2025) as illustrated in Appendix A.4.
The high-level planner is given a task description ω, obtains environment state M t from EPM
(Sec. 3.1), and selects an action (Navigate/Open/Pick/Place) parameterized by entities from M t,
which are translated into low-level controls via a skill policy. We use privileged skills to focus our
study on perception and planning and note that our framework is agnostic to skill implementation.
Skills execute until failure or termination, at which time the planner is called again. For a fair
comparison, we adopt the same skills for the baselines.
High-Level Planner. Following Chang et al. (2025), we use ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) to enable
an LLM to take actions in the environment. The prompt at time t is concatenated text representing
objects in M t, where each object consists of a UID and a description from EPM (Sec. 3.2). Auto-
regressive action predictions are interleaved with world representations, resembling an instruct LLM
format (Grattaﬁori et al., 2024). To avoid excessive context lengths, at each step, only objects updated
by EPM are added to the context. See Appendix A.4 for details and prompt examples.
4.2
TRAINING THE HIGH-LEVEL PLANNER
While the prompting format described above enables non-trival zero-shot performance from pre-
trained LLMs (see Table 3), the domain of embodied planning is underrepresented in typical LLM
training data. The primary challenge is sourcing high-quality data for embodied planning to further
improve performance. We procure this data in two ways: ﬁrst, by transforming human demonstrations
teleoperated in simulation into robot-compatible plans, and second, using a novel online reinforcement
learning method to improve the planner with experience in the environment.
Training With Human Demonstrations. We use data derived from human demonstrations to
train planning models to solve PARTNR tasks (Chang et al., 2025). The factorization of perception
and action (Liang et al., 2023) poses the following challenge: how can we learn to plan from
demonstrations when different systems of perception induce different optimal actions? For example,
Note that these heuristics are only used to generate training data, not at inference time.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Function: toPlanningTrace(demonstration): 
  env = initEnvironment() 
  perception = initEPM() 
  trace = [] 
  for frame in demonstration: 
    observation = env.step(frame) 
    perception.step(observation) 
    if frame.action in {Pick|Place|Open|Close}: 
      inferExploration(trace, perception, frame) 
      inferNavigation(trace, frame) 
      trace.append(frame) 
  optimize(trace) 
  trace.append(Done[]) 
  return trace
inferExploration: Exploration is required if the object was not 
observed at the end of the previous action.
Place(Spoon, 
DiningTable)
Pick(spoon)
Place(Spoon, 
DiningTable)
Pick(spoon)
optimize: Remove interactions that fail to progress the task.
1. Infer exploration targets: 
which furniture?
2. Sample Exploration 
Actions: How many?
3. Inject Objects into 
the EPM
candidates = LLM( 
  task, scene 
)
N ~ 
   
1
𝑖+ 𝛼
perception.add( 
  
 
)
(target1….N) . objects
Figure 3: Planning Traces from Human Demonstration. We replay human demonstrations in
simulation while rolling out a perception system in-the-loop. To adapt the trace to the perception
system and teach the agent exploration, we infer a sequence of exploration actions. Finally, we
mitigate sub-optimal human demonstrations by removing interactions that fail to make task progress.
an agent with “pixel-perfect” perception can simply spin in place to identify many objects in a room,
whereas a nearsighted agent must move about the space to achieve similar understanding (Gibson,
1979). We address this problem by replaying teleoperations in simulation while running perception
in-the-loop. This enables perception-speciﬁc planning traces without needing to collect perception-
speciﬁc demonstrations. We ﬁne-tune LLMs on these traces using LoRA (Hu et al., 2022).
Our approach to deriving training data for high-level planning is illustrated in Fig. 3. Each human
demonstration consists of a sequence of agent and object poses along with an interaction label (Pick/
Place/Open / Close/None). At each step, we update the environment state and EPM. We derive
high-level planning actions as follows. Each interaction label implies a planning action. The trace
must also reﬂect object discovery and navigation, so we add Explore and Navigate actions
accordingly. In particular, if the EPM has not yet detected the interaction object by the end of the
previous action, we add Explore actions to ﬁnd it. To teach exhaustive search behavior, we sample
exploration actions that fail to reveal the object. To teach robustness to EPM hallucinations, we
sample Nav-Pick actions to hallucinated objects during exploration. Finally, we optimize the resulting
trace by removing interaction sequences that fail to make progress toward success according to the
episode’s evaluation function. This enables us to mitigate occasional suboptimal behaviors in the
human demonstration dataset. Collectively, this process yields a planning trace we use for training.
We provide further details in Appendix A.6.
Improving Planning With DDAFT. To improve planning performance with online experience, we
ﬁnetune our planner using a novel formulation of value-function-free RL for LLMs we call Dynamic
Difﬁculty-Aware FineTuning, or DDAFT. The goal of DDAFT is to improve performance by efﬁciently
searching the planning space for higher-quality planning behavior. While typically, methods focused
on improving reasoning (Shao et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024) sample instructions uniformly
from the training data, DDAFT shapes the sampling space toward difﬁcult instruction to improve
sample efﬁciency. This is similar to DART-Math (Tong et al., 2024), however, DART-Math produces
a static ﬁnetuning dataset, while DDAFT is run iteratively, using the current policy to dynamically
estimate the difﬁculty of instructions, leading to superior performance and sample efﬁciency.
Given a set of tasks available for training ω →T and a task-conditioned initial planning policy
ε0(a|s, ω) (e.g., the one we learned above from human demonstrations), we ﬁrst roll out ε0 on all
episodes in E producing an initial dataset of traces (denoted with x) with task rewards (denoted
with r), D0 = {(x0, r0), . . . (xn, rn)}. The process continues by alternating between ﬁnetuning a
planning model on the dataset Dt and sampling new traces to form a new dataset. Many different loss
functions commonly used in reinforcement learning or language model ﬁnetuning are compatible
with this formulation (Schulman et al., 2017; Shao et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024). For the
experiments in this work we ﬁt the RFT objective (Yuan et al., 2023).
Instead of sampling new traces uniformly across the training episodes, as is typically done for
LLM reasoning ﬁnetuning (Shao et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2023), DDAFT biases sampling so that
exploration is focused on episodes for which the dataset currently contains no successful examples.
We do this by sampling which episodes to generate new traces on from a distribution induced by the
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Add credit card on table 
Add scissors on table
Add plate on chair
Add cushion
Remove cushion
Add  cup on counter
Simulation Results (PARTNR) 
Real-World Results (Spot-Indoor)
EPM (ours) 
EPM (ours)
Add basket on nightstand 
Add cushion on floor 
Add book (book was 
previously added)
Add book with sofa 
Add plush toy with sofa
Add bottle
Add bowl
DynaMem 
GPT-4o 
Figure 4: Qualitative Perception Results. Left: Ofﬂine evaluation results of the EPM on the
PARTNR dataset, with examples of object addition (top) and removal of mislabeled objects (bottom).
Right: Results for EPM, along with the proposed baselines in the real world. The orange dots and
bounding box highlight the objects localized by the different methods.
softmax over the failure rates of each episode in the dataset so far. The formalism of this approach,
along with comparisons against DART-Math and Online-RFT can be found in Appendix A.7.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We measure the ability of our system (1) to perceive and represent dynamic environments and (2)
to enable agents to perform long-horizon planning. We ﬁrst evaluate the EPM in egocentric videos,
with annotated actions and camera poses, that depict a robot interacting with objects in an indoor
environment. This experiment demonstrates perception capabilities of EPM independent of planning.
Next, we present our main result by evaluating EPM within our planning framework on the PARTNR
benchmark (Chang et al., 2025). This evaluation demonstrates the joint ability of EPM and our
planning methods to perform long-horizon natural language tasks in large indoor environments.
5.1
PERCEPTION EVALUATION
We ﬁrst evaluate the EPM independently of planning: given an agent taking actions in an environment,
we measure the ability to track the environment over time. We consider two datasets:
• PARTNR (Chang et al., 2025): To evaluate the performance of our memory representation in large
indoor environments, we generate single-agent demonstrations from the PARTNR validation set
and obtain the environment state every K agent steps, as described in Sec 3.2. This results in 1000
demonstrations in 12 different scenes with different object conﬁgurations in each episode.
• Spot-Indoor: To measure whether our representation transfers to real-world scenarios, we collect
a dataset of 30 interaction sequences (15 human, 15 robot) recorded in a ↓155m2 apartment
using a Spot robot. While large-scale datasets like EPIC Kitchens (Damen et al., 2020) and EPIC
Fields (Tschernezki et al., 2023) provide dynamic scenes and global poses, they lack the dense
depth data required for our approach. Our dataset contains 1,100 frames where, in each sequence,
target and distractor objects are relocated between various receptacles. In half of the sequences,
humans make changes to the environment as well. We label the dataset by manually annotating the
relevant objects and distractors, listing the ﬁrst frame where a given object is seen and the frames at
which an object moves.
Metrics. To evaluate the spatial memory, we construct at each timestep t an environment graph
ˆGt given the environment state M t. Nodes correspond to entities in M t (objects or furniture) and
edges denote relations. We deﬁne a partially observable graph Gt using groundtruth, representing the
environment that can be observed given the agent’s observations up to time t. We align Gt and ˆGt
with bipartite matching based on node distances (matching entities if the name matches and distance
is <0.5) and report Precision, Recall and F1 scores for nodes and edges averaged across time.
Baselines. We compare our approach with the following external memory baselines:
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Node Metrics
Edge Metrics
Method
Dataset
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
GT
PARTNR
0.86±0.01
0.54±0.02
0.60±0.02
0.83±0.01
0.54±0.02
0.63±0.02
GPT-4o
PARTNR
0.00±0.00
0.05±0.01
0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
DynaMem
PARTNR
0.04±0.00
0.10±0.01
0.05±0.00
-
-
-
EPM
PARTNR
0.36±0.01
0.42±0.01
0.34±0.01
0.66±0.02
0.38±0.02
0.46±0.02
GPT-4o
Spot-Indoor
0.01±0.00
0.65±0.04
0.02±0.00
0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
Dynamem
Spot-Indoor
0.42±0.03
0.73±0.03
0.51±0.03
-
-
-
EPM
Spot-Indoor
0.30±0.05
0.33±0.05
0.24±0.03
0.28±0.06
0.12±0.03
0.16±0.04
Table 2: Perception-only Results. Perception evaluation outside the planning loop.
• GT: To demonstrate the challenges of the PARTNR dataset, we design a privileged version of EPM,
where objects are added based on a groundtruth sensor if they are within a distance range from the
agent and occupy a minimal area of the agent’s observation.
• GPT-4o: We design the memory as in EPM, but obtain update operations via GPT-4o.
• DynaMem: We choose DynaMem (Liu et al., 2024a) as our main baseline as it is open-vocabulary,
shown to work with LLM planners in the real-world, and handles dynamic scenes. DynaMem
stores aggregated object embeddings in a global voxel grid, along with RGB-D and pose data. For
a query, it retrieves the closest voxel via feature-matching (Zhai et al., 2023) and then uses an
object-detector (Minderer et al., 2023) on the associated frame to locate the object. If found, the
bounding box and depth provide the 3D position. We query each frame using all object categories
in our dataset. As object relationships require exhaustive pairwise queries, we omit edge metrics.
5.1.1
PERCEPTION-ONLY RESULTS
In this section, we report perception results in an ofﬂine setting (i.e., outside the context of planning).
EPM outperforms baselines signiﬁcantly in simulation (Table 2 top). However, the performance is far
from saturation (F1-node 0.34), due to the challenging nature of the dataset, where objects are often
partially visible or seen from far away (see GT performance). Our approach can localize and add
objects to the memory, along with their relationships, and remove incorrectly-added objects (Fig. 4
left). To evaluate real-world generalization, we report the results on the Spot-Indoor dataset (Table 2
bottom). Note that our memory operations are learned using only simulation data. Generally, the
model is able to localize objects and relationships in the real world, but often mis-categorizes objects
and fails to associate multiple instances of the same object (Fig. 4 right). More analysis can be found
in Appendix A.3. DynaMem obtains the best performance, but requires querying an object detector
with every object from a vocabulary, which is unfeasible with large vocabularies. As we show later in
our planning results, these limitations lead to signiﬁcant drops in planning performance and efﬁciency
compared to our model. Also, note that DynaMem cannot infer relationships (hence, no edge metric
is reported). GPT-4o tends to hallucinate objects and labels, resulting in much lower node precision.
5.2
PLANNING EVALUATION
We evaluate the planning framework with EPM memory against a benchmark of household tasks.
We use this online evaluation to draw conclusions about the utility of EPM as a dynamic memory
for task planning and the efﬁcacy of our planner to successfully perform tasks given this system of
perception. We evaluate against a single-agent version of the PARTNR benchmark (Chang et al.,
2025), and report results against the held-out validation split of 1,000 episodes covering 12 unique
scenes from the Habitat Synthetic Scenes dataset (HSSD (Khanna et al., 2024)).
Metrics. Following PARTNR evaluation protocols, we report metrics across axes of task completion
and efﬁciency. Success Rate: The percentage of episodes completed successfully, Percent Complete:
the average progress through each task, even if not fully completed, Simulation Steps: the average
number of steps taken in the simulator across all episodes, Planning Cycles: the average number
of high-level actions, and Extraneous Actions: the ratio of unnecessary rearrangements over total
rearrangements. The last two are not relevant to the DynaMem baseline as it uses open-loop planning.
Baselines. We compare against the following baselines:
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Row
Method
Perception
Success
Rate ↔
Percent
Complete ↔
Simulation
Steps ↗
Planning
Cycles ↗
Extraneous
Actions ↗
1
DynaMem (Liu et al., 2024a)
GT
0.17 ± 0.01
0.33 ± 0.01
7611 ± 130
-
-
2
PP (Chang et al., 2025)
GT
0.51 ± 0.02
0.67 ± 0.01
1570 ± 40
17.6 ± 0.4
0.19 ± 0.01
3
PP+DDAFT (ours)
GT
0.66 ± 0.02
0.78 ± 0.01
2160 ± 60
22.3 ± 0.5
0.19 ± 0.01
4
HD (ours)
GT
0.63 ± 0.02
0.74 ± 0.01
2110 ± 80
21.6 ± 0.6
0.17 ± 0.01
5
HD+DDAFT (ours)
GT
0.68 ± 0.02
0.80 ± 0.01
2550 ± 90
22.7 ± 0.5
0.15 ± 0.01
6
DynaMem (Liu et al., 2024a)
DynaMem
0.03 ± 0.01
0.11 ± 0.01
5090 ± 120
-
-
7
PP (Chang et al., 2025)
Learned
0.46 ± 0.02
0.65 ± 0.01
1850 ± 50
19.7 ± 0.4
0.28 ± 0.01
8
PP+DDAFT (ours)
Learned
0.58 ± 0.02
0.74 ± 0.01
2200 ± 60
23.2 ± 0.5
0.27 ± 0.01
9
HD (ours)
Learned
0.55 ± 0.02
0.69 ± 0.01
3040 ± 110
30.2 ± 0.8
0.17 ± 0.01
10
HD+DDAFT (ours)
Learned
0.58 ± 0.02
0.74 ± 0.01
2250 ± 70
23.6 ± 0.6
0.23 ± 0.01
Table 3: Planning Results. Results on the PARTNR single-agent benchmark. We pair planners with
various forms of memory in the groundtruth (top) and learned (bottom) perception settings.
• DynaMem: The perception system described in Sec. 5.1 is combined with a grid-based navigation
system that linearly combines voxel-last-seen timestamps and voxel-to-query alignment scores to
identify exploration frontiers. The system explores until input query is found then picks or places
on it. Based on proposed system in Liu et al. (2024b), we add a few-shot open-loop LLM planner
to decompose tasks into pick-and-place objectives. We tested several ablations of DynaMem
speciﬁcally testing performance if we used: (a) GT object segmentation and categories instead of
object-detector, (b) room-labels along-with object categories (referred to as Room in appendix),
and (c) only voxel-last-seen timestamp (TimeOnly) for exploration instead of linear combination.
We report the best performing variant in Table 3. See Appendix A.5 for details.
• PP, PARTNR-Pretrained (Chang et al., 2025): LLM planning with EPM using the prompting strat-
egy described in Section 4.1 using Llama3.3-70b-Instruct, with no additional ﬁnetuning.
• HD: Planning with EPM with LLama3.1-8b-Instruct ﬁne-tuned on traces derived from
Human Demonstrations as described in Section 4.2. For training, we use demonstrations from the
100,000 tasks in the PARTNR Train split (Chang et al., 2025).
• PP+DDAFT: Starting with the PP model as the base model, we run 5 iterations of DDAFT on a
2,000 episode subset of the PARTNR training data, sampling 2,000 episodes per iteration.
• HD+DDAFT: Planning with EPM with a model ﬁne-tuned on demonstration and RL data. Using
HD as the base model, we perform policy improvement following PP+DDAFT.
5.2.1
PLANNING RESULTS
We report PARTNR planning results in Table 3 with groundtruth (top) and learned (bottom) perception
and highlight key ﬁndings below.
HD plans effectively from EPM representations. Our HD method outperforms PP in the GT
perception setting by 0.12 success (row 4 vs 2) despite a smaller model size (8b vs 70b parameters).
Following DDAFT, this trend continues (0.68 vs 0.66 SR; row 5 vs 3). This shows that deriving
traces from demonstrations is an effective approach to learn embodied task planning.
HD adapts to EPM failures. With learned perception, HD outperforms PP (row 8 vs 7) and even
outperforms PP with perfect perception (row 8 vs 2). This shows that demonstrations teach effective
planning without the need for collecting perception-speciﬁc planning traces.
DDAFT enables policy improvement over both PP and HD policies. With GT perception, DDAFT
leads to success improvements of 0.15 for PP and 0.05 for HD (comparing row 3 to row 2, and row
5 to row 4, respectively). This extends to learned perception, where we observe improvement of
0.12 and 0.03 success for PP and HD, respectively (row 8 vs 7, row 10 vs 9). This showcases the
generality of DDAFT to improve text-based planning policies that leverage the EPM.
Our methods with EPM in the loop outperform strong baselines in task planning. Our methods
(rows 8-10) outperform strong baselines (rows 6&7) by a large margin (55% and 12% improvement
in success rate over DynaMem and PP, respectively). To ensure that DynaMem’s lower performance
is not attributable to simulation visuals, we also provide DynaMem with groundtruth perception (row
1). Nevertheless, its performance remains inferior to ours. In addition to exploration challenges, tasks
may require speciﬁc instance or multiple instances of objects (‘all forks’) and furniture (‘table in
ofﬁce’) which are not handled well by the retrieval-then-detection based algorithms. It should be
noted that our method is 3.5x faster than DynaMem. PP shows lower sim steps and planning cycles
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
than our methods. That is primarily due to solving shorter horizon tasks. See Appendix A.8-A.10 for
more results and a further discussion.
5.2.2
REAL WORLD EVALUATION
To evaluate the effectiveness of our method in real-world scenarios, we test the PP+DDAFT planner
together with the learned EPM in an indoor environment, using the Spot robot. We use our planning
and memory system to predict high-level actions given a language instruction and adapt the work
from Yokoyama et al. (2023) to parse the high-level instructions into motor skills. We test the system
in 20 different scenarios, which require the robot to move objects to target locations in presence of
clutter. The robot succeeds in 55% of the tasks, with failures coming from both planning and skill
execution errors. In 70% of the tasks, the EPM succeeds at predicting the correct plan. More details
can be found in the Appendix A.10.
6
CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
We present EPM, a novel learnable memory for embodied planning models. We show that the
explicit world representation of EPM allows for seamless integration with LLM-based planners.
Further, we show that signal for training planning models on this representation can be extracted
from general human demonstrations, and our novel DDAFT method improves planning performance
in all settings. Our proposed planning approach outperforms baselines even when they are provided
with ground-truth perception.
Our training is limited to simulation data due to the complex nature of collecting a large-scale
real-world dataset for dynamic scenes with detailed planning actions. We leave real-world training for
future work. We also note that purely text-based representations could inhibit planning performance
in certain settings. Our EPM formulation is general enough to incorporate visual information as
continuous features, provided the training data includes such modalities. For example, if a task
requires reasoning about object properties not represented in text, the planner has no way to solve the
task. In those scenarios, a hybrid system could pair the EPM with specialized visuomotor or VLA
modules that operate directly on the current observation and do not require persistent memory. We
leave this exploration for future work.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey
Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek
Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev,
Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do
as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In CoRL, 2022. 3
Alper Aydemir, Andrzej Pronobis, Moritz Göbelbecker, and Patric Jensfelt. Active visual object
search in unknown environments using uncertain semantics. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2013.
3
Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang,
Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist
humanoid robots. arXiv, 2025. 3
Ben Bolte, Austin Wang, Jimmy Yang, Mustafa Mukadam, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, and Chris Paxton.
Usa-net: Uniﬁed semantic and affordance representations for robot memory. In IROS, 2023. 4
Matthew Chang, Theophile Gervet, Mukul Khanna, Sriram Yenamandra, Dhruv Shah, So Yeon Min,
Kavit Shah, Chris Paxton, Saurabh Gupta, Dhruv Batra, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Jitendra Malik, and
Devendra Singh Chaplot. Goat: Go to any thing. In RSS, 2024. 1, 2, 3
Matthew Chang, Gunjan Chhablani, Alexander Clegg, Mikael Dallaire Cote, Ruta Desai, Michal
Hlavac, Vladimir Karashchuk, Jacob Krantz, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Priyam Parashar, et al. Partnr: A
benchmark for planning and reasoning in embodied multi-agent tasks. ICLR, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8,
9, 18, 19, 21, 24, 28, 32
Boyuan Chen, Fei Xia, Brian Ichter, Kanishka Rao, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Michael S Ryoo,
Austin Stone, and Daniel Kappler. Open-vocabulary queryable scene representations for real world
planning. In ICRA, 2023. 4
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al. The epic-kitchens
dataset: Collection, challenges and baselines. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 2020. 7
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Ayzaan Wahid,
Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, et al. Palm-e: An embodied
multimodal language model. In ICML, 2023. 3
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. In ICML, 2024. 6
Yingchun Fan, Qichi Zhang, Yuliang Tang, Shaofen Liu, and Hong Han. Blitz-slam: A semantic
slam in dynamic environments. Pattern Recognition, 2022. 4, 15
James J Gibson. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Houghton, Mifﬂin and Company,
1979. 6
Aaron Grattaﬁori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of
models. arXiv, 2024. 5, 24, 32
Qiao Gu, Ali Kuwajerwala, Sacha Morin, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Bipasha Sen, Aditya
Agarwal, Corban Rivera, William Paul, Kirsty Ellis, Rama Chellappa, et al. Conceptgraphs:
Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning. In ICRA, 2024a. 1, 3, 4
Qiao Gu, Zhaoyang Lv, Duncan Frost, Simon Green, Julian Straub, and Chris Sweeney. Egolifter:
Open-world 3d segmentation for egocentric perception. In ECCV, 2024b. 5
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Saurabh Gupta, James Davidson, Sergey Levine, Rahul Sukthankar, and Jitendra Malik. Cognitive
mapping and planning for visual navigation. In CVPR, 2017. 3
Huy Ha and Shuran Song. Semantic abstraction: Open-world 3d scene understanding from 2d
vision-language models. In CoRL, 2022. 3
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR, 2022. 5, 6, 15,
24
Chenguang Huang, Oier Mees, Andy Zeng, and Wolfram Burgard. Visual language maps for robot
navigation. In ICRA, 2023a. 3
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. In CoRL, 2023b. 3
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda
Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and brian ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
through planning with language models. In CoRL, 2023c. 3
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Yunzhu Li, Ruohan Zhang, and Li Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-temporal
reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. In CoRL, 2024. 3
Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Alihusein Kuwajerwala, Qiao Gu, Mohd Omama, Tao Chen, Alaa
Maalouf, Shuang Li, Ganesh Iyer, Soroush Saryazdi, Nikhil Keetha, et al. Conceptfusion: Open-set
multimodal 3d mapping. In RSS, 2023. 1, 3
Mazeyu Ji, Ri-Zhao Qiu, Xueyan Zou, and Xiaolong Wang. Graspsplats: Efﬁcient manipulation with
3d feature splatting. In CoRL, 2024. 3
Haochen Jiang, Yueming Xu, Kejie Li, Jianfeng Feng, and Li Zhang. Rodyn-slam: Robust dynamic
dense rgb-d slam with neural radiance ﬁelds. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024. 4, 15
Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Language
embedded radiance ﬁelds. In ICCV, 2023. 3
Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra,
Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X Chang, and Manolis Savva. Habitat synthetic scenes
dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of 3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal navigation.
In CVPR, 2024. 8, 32
Sebastian Koch, Narunas Vaskevicius, Mirco Colosi, Pedro Hermosilla, and Timo Ropinski.
Open3dsg: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs from point clouds with queryable objects and
open-set relationships. In CVPR, 2024. 4
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan
Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. arXiv, 2024. 5, 33
Boyi Li, Kilian Q Weinberger, Serge Belongie, Vladlen Koltun, and René Ranftl. Language-driven
semantic segmentation. In ICLR, 2022. 3
Yi Li, Yuquan Deng, Jesse Zhang, Joel Jang, Marius Memmel, Raymond Yu, Caelan Reed Garrett,
Fabio Ramos, Dieter Fox, Anqi Li, et al. Hamster: Hierarchical action models for open-world
robot manipulation. In ICLR, 2025. 3
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In ICRA, 2023. 5
Peiqi Liu, Zhanqiu Guo, Mohit Warke, Soumith Chintala, Chris Paxton, Nur Muhammad Mahi
Shaﬁullah, and Lerrel Pinto. Dynamem: Online dynamic spatio-semantic memory for open world
mobile manipulation. arXiv, 2024a. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 21, 33
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Peiqi Liu, Yaswanth Orru, Jay Vakil, Chris Paxton, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shaﬁullah, and Lerrel
Pinto. Ok-robot: What really matters in integrating open-knowledge models for robotics. In RSS,
2024b. 9, 21
Dominic Maggio, Yun Chang, Nathan Hughes, Matthew Trang, Dan Grifﬁth, Carlyn Dougherty,
Eric Cristofalo, Lukas Schmid, and Luca Carlone. Clio: Real-time task-driven open-set 3d scene
graphs. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024. 3
Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection.
In NeurIPS, 2023. 8
Soroush Nasiriany, Fei Xia, Wenhao Yu, Ted Xiao, Jacky Liang, Ishita Dasgupta, Annie Xie, Danny
Driess, Ayzaan Wahid, Zhuo Xu, Quan Vuong, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Kuang-
Huei Lee, Peng Xu, Sean Kirmani, Yuke Zhu, Andy Zeng, Karol Hausman, Nicolas Heess,
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Brian Ichter. Pivot: Iterative visual prompting elicits actionable
knowledge for vlms. In ICML, 2024. 3
Ri-Zhao Qiu, Yafei Hu, Yuchen Song, Ge Yang, Yang Fu, Jianglong Ye, Jiteng Mu, Ruihan Yang,
Nikolay Atanasov, Sebastian Scherer, et al. Learning generalizable feature ﬁelds for mobile
manipulation. arXiv, 2024. 3
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021. 3
Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf.
Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning.
In CoRL, 2023. 3
Hello Robot. Stretch ai: Dynamem code, 2025. URL https://github.com/hello-robot/
stretch_ai/blob/main/docs/dynamem.md. 21
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
themselves to use tools. In NeurIPS, 2023. 3
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv, 2017. 6
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv, 2024. 2, 6
Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Brian Ichter, Michael Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James
Tanner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy
Groom, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with
hierarchical vision-language-action models. arXiv, 2025. 3
Ola Shorinwa, Johnathan Tucker, Aliyah Smith, Aiden Swann, Timothy Chen, Roya Firoozi, Monroe
Kennedy III, and Mac Schwager. Splat-mover: Multi-stage, open-vocabulary robotic manipulation
via editable gaussian splatting. In CoRL, 2024. 3
Zhenggang Tang, Yuchen Fan, Dilin Wang, Hongyu Xu, Rakesh Ranjan, Alexander Schwing, and
Zhicheng Yan. Mvdust3r+: Single-stage scene reconstruction from sparse views in 2 seconds. In
CVPR, 2025. 5
Yuxuan Tong, Xiwen Zhang, Rui Wang, Ruidong Wu, and Junxian He. Dart-math: Difﬁculty-aware
rejection tuning for mathematical problem-solving. In NeurIPS, 2024. 2, 6, 26
Vadim Tschernezki, Ahmad Darkhalil, Zhifan Zhu, David Fouhey, Iro Larina, Diane Larlus, Dima
Damen, and Andrea Vedaldi. EPIC Fields: Marrying 3D Geometry and Video Understanding. In
NeurIPS, 2023. 7
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David
Novotny. Vggt: Visual geometry grounded transformer. In CVPR, 2025. 5
Shu Wang, Muzhi Han, Ziyuan Jiao, Zeyu Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Hangxin Liu.
Llm^ 3: Large language model-based task and motion planning with motion failure reasoning. In
IROS, 2024. 3
Yixuan Wang, Mingtong Zhang, Zhuoran Li, Katherine Rose Driggs-Campbell, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-
Fei, and Yunzhu Li. D3 ﬁelds: Dynamic 3d descriptor ﬁelds for zero-shot generalizable robotic
manipulation. In ICRA 2024 Workshop on 3D Visual Representations for Robot Manipulation,
2023. 4
Wenhua Wu, Guangming Wang, Ting Deng, Sebastian Aegidius, Stuart Shanks, Valerio Modugno,
Dimitrios Kanoulas, and Hesheng Wang. Dvn-slam: Dynamic visual neural slam based on
local-global encoding. In ICRA, 2024. 4, 15
Boyang Xue, Qi Zhu, Hongru Wang, Rui Wang, Sheng Wang, Hongling Xu, Fei Mi, Yasheng Wang,
Lifeng Shang, Qun Liu, et al. Dast: Difﬁculty-aware self-training on large language models. arXiv,
2025. 27
Zhijie Yan, Shufei Li, Zuoxu Wang, Lixiu Wu, Han Wang, Jun Zhu, Lijiang Chen, and Jihong Liu.
Dynamic open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for long-term language-guided mobile manipulation.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025. 4
Yuncong Yang, Han Yang, Jiachen Zhou, Peihao Chen, Hongxin Zhang, Yilun Du, and Chuang Gan.
3d-mem: 3d scene memory for embodied exploration and reasoning. In CVPR, 2025. 1, 2, 3
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In ICLR, 2023. 5
Naoki Yokoyama, Alexander William Clegg, Joanne Truong, Eric Undersander, Tsung-Yen Yang,
Sergio Arnaud, Sehoon Ha, Dhruv Batra, and Akshara Rai. Adaptive skill coordination for robotic
mobile manipulation. arXiv, 2023. 10, 31
Chao Yu, Zuxin Liu, Xin-Jun Liu, Fugui Xie, Yi Yang, Qi Wei, and Qiao Fei. Ds-slam: A semantic
visual slam towards dynamic environments. In IROS, 2018. 4, 15
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chengpeng Li, Guanting Dong, Keming Lu, Chuanqi Tan, Chang Zhou,
and Jingren Zhou. Scaling relationship on learning mathematical reasoning with large language
models. arXiv, 2023. 2, 6, 27
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Federico
Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael S Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, et al. Socratic models:
Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. In ICLR, 2022. 3
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
image pre-training. In ICCV, 2023. 8
14