--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
THE HUMAN BRAIN AS A DYNAMIC MIXTURE OF
EXPERT MODELS IN VIDEO UNDERSTANDING
Christina Sartzetaki∗1, Anne W. Zonneveld∗1, Pablo Oyarzo2, Alessandro T. Gifford2,
Radoslaw M. Cichy2, Pascal Mettes1, Iris I.A. Groen1
1Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2Department of Education and Psychology, Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Germany
{c.sartzetaki, a.w.zonneveld, i.i.a.groen}@uva.nl
ABSTRACT
The human brain is the most efficient and versatile system for processing dynamic
visual input. By comparing representations from deep video models to brain activ-
ity, we can gain insights into mechanistic solutions for effective video processing,
important to better understand the brain and to build better models. Current works
in model-brain alignment primarily focus on fMRI measurements, leaving open
questions about fine-grained dynamic processing. Here, we introduce the first
large-scale model benchmarking on alignment to dynamic electroencephalogra-
phy (EEG) recordings of short natural videos. We analyze 100+ models across the
axes of temporal integration, classification task, architecture, and pretraining, us-
ing our proposed Cross-Temporal Representational Similarity Analysis (CT-RSA)
which matches the best time-unfolded model features to dynamically evolving
brain responses, distilling 107 alignment scores. Our findings reveal novel in-
sights on how continuous visual input is integrated in the brain, beyond the stan-
dard temporal processing hierarchy from low to high-level representations. After
initial alignment to hierarchical static object processing, responses in posterior
electrodes best align to mid-level temporally-integrative action features, showing
high temporal correspondence to feature timings. In contrast, responses in frontal
electrodes best align with high-level static action representations and show no
temporal correspondence to the video. Additionally, temporally-integrating state-
space models show superior alignment to intermediate posterior activity, in which
self-supervised pretraining is also beneficial. We draw a metaphor to a dynamic
mixture of expert models for the changing neural preference in tasks and temporal
integration reflected in the alignment to different model types across time. We
posit that a single best-aligned model would need such training and architecture
as to allow combining and dynamically switching between these capacities.
1
INTRODUCTION
Humans are able to perceive and understand a highly dynamic world efficiently, with neural repre-
sentations changing dynamically in response to continuous visual information. The framework of
representational alignment (Sucholutsky et al., 2025) provides a rich resource to investigate how hu-
mans achieve this and for guiding model design. Within computational cognitive neuroscience, this
framework is used to identify the mechanisms giving rise to cognition through hypothesis testing
with task-performing computational models (Kriegeskorte & Douglas, 2018; Doerig et al., 2023),
with deep neural network computer vision models being the best models capturing neural responses
in visual cortex (Yamins et al., 2014; G¨uc¸l¨u & Van Gerven, 2015). Conversely, machine learning
can draw from cognitive neuroscience to inform more efficient and robust human-like artificial intel-
ligence, e.g. through implementations of brain-like energy constraints (Lu et al., 2025a), feedback
pathways (Konkle & Alvarez, 2023), human-like development (Lu et al., 2025b), perceptual straight-
ening (H´enaff et al., 2019; Bagad & Zisserman, 2025), or even explicit finetuning on neural or cog-
nitive data (Muttenthaler et al., 2025; Safarani et al., 2021; Moussa et al., 2025). Computational
cognitive neuroscience has employed large-scale benchmarking as a tool for systematic and repro-
ducible comparisons of model-brain representational alignment (Conwell et al., 2024) under natural
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Temporally-integrating Models
Static Models
Human Brain
(C, H, W)
xT
...
Example 3s video
Electrode vectors
at tN = 1
video i
video j
Feature vectors
at tM = 1
Pearson’s r
Pearson’s r
Spearman’s ρ between 
all model time-points M
and all EEG time-points N
e.g. VideoMAE, MViT, X3D, SlowFast
e.g. C2D, Xception, ViT, Swin
I.Extraction of model and brain time-unfolded representations from short videos
II. Cross-Temporal Representational Similarity Analysis 
(CT-RSA) between models and brain
tM =  1
(i, j)
...
...
(i, j)
?
...
Posterior
Frontal
Representational 
Dissimilarity 
Matrix (RDM)
tN =1
tN =N
tM =  M
tM =  2
tM =  1
tM =  M
tM =  2
tN =  1
tN =  N
tN =  2
...
tN =  1
tN =  N
ρ at best 
L and tM
Best L
Best tM
Layer L
EEG voltage (μV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time (s)
Figure 1: Our method for evaluating alignment of 100+ models with dynamic EEG responses to
video. The extraction of time-unfolded representations from both systems (left) is followed by CT-
RSA (right), which computes the maximum model-brain alignment across all timepoints and layers
of a model. We systematically vary the axes of temporal integration, classification task, architecture,
and pretraining - here we highlight differences in model temporal integration.
- mostly static image - stimuli, following the introduction of neural benchmark datasets (Schrimpf
et al., 2018; Cichy et al., 2019; 2021; Gifford et al., 2023; 2024; Allen et al., 2022; Hebart et al.,
2023; Lahner et al., 2024). However, static images lack temporal context, which strongly affects
visual processing (Willems & Peelen, 2021), as for example illustrated by the temporal adaptation
of neural responses (Benda, 2021; Brands et al., 2024). Critically, findings from static image percep-
tion do not automatically generalize to real-world conditions (Russ et al., 2023; David et al., 2004).
This highlights a need for large-scale benchmark initiatives for dynamic video stimuli.
Recent work benchmarked model alignment to video fMRI (Sartzetaki et al., 2025; Garcia et al.,
2025; Tang et al., 2025), showing how key axes of variation in those models (e.g. architecture, task
training, temporal integration) affect brain alignment. However, these works did not yet consider
two crucial factors: the rich dynamics that characterize neural responses, accessible non-invasively
in humans via M/EEG, as well as the dynamics of temporally unfolded model features. In this study,
we employ large-scale alignment benchmarking of deep neural network models on dynamic human
brain responses to natural videos using EEG, and leverage unfolded model features through our
proposed Cross-Temporal Representational Similarity Analysis (CT-RSA). Our contributions:
• We present the first large-scale representational alignment benchmarking on dynamic brain re-
sponses (EEG) to natural videos, evaluating 100+ static and temporally-integrating deep neural
network models using Cross-Temporal Representational Similarity Analysis (CT-RSA), which
matches the best time-unfolded model features across the EEG time-course.
• Our results reveal a changing neural preference for semantic tasks and temporal integration over
time, and preferential specialization across the brain hierarchy (posterior-frontal). Posterior ac-
tivity evolves from alignment with static, hierarchically increasing object processing to mid-level
action representations, continuously tracking the video through temporal integration - whereas
frontal activity is best captured by early, static semantic action representations.
• Leveraging the time-unfolded model features, we show a strong temporal correspondence be-
tween model time and EEG time in posterior activity, but not in frontal activity.
• Comparing the additional axes of variation of model architecture and pretraining within mod-
els of the same task and temporal integration, we show that state-space models better align to
intermediate posterior processing, in which self-supervised pretraining is also beneficial.
Overall, our results suggest that neural representations reflected in fine-grained dynamic brain mea-
surements are not best captured by any single DNN model type but rather resemble a dynamic
mixture of expert models that allows switching between semantic tasks and temporal integration,
revealing opportunities for brain-inspired representation learning on videos.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2
RELATED WORK
Dynamic brain measurements under static and dynamic natural stimuli. Human brain dynam-
ics are studied at different timescales with distinct methods. For short timescales, usage of M/EEG is
essential to make millisecond-level inferences, whereas the sluggish hemodynamic response under-
lying fMRI prevents such precision. For static stimuli (i.e., images), findings from M/EEG studies
of brain dynamics show that discriminable representations emerge as quick as within 50 ms after
stimulus onset (Cichy et al., 2014), due to a fast feedforward sweep of visual information processing
from early to later stage brain areas, i.e. the cortical hierarchy (Serre et al., 2007). Early neural pro-
cessing of static images has been found to reflect low-level visual features (Groen et al., 2013), while
later neural processing to reflect high-level representations, e.g. categorical processing (Cichy et al.,
2014) and task performance (VanRullen & Thorpe, 2001), illustrating a gradual emergence of high-
level representations over time: a “temporal hierarchy”(Bankson et al., 2018; Cichy et al., 2016).
This has not only been observed for static objects, but also for static scenes (Greene & Hansen,
2020) and static actions (Zimmermann et al., 2025). From these studies, high-level action informa-
tion appears to emerge later (250 ms) than high-level object and scene information (150 ms). This
may reflect a need for integration of contextual information for action recognition (El-Sourani et al.,
2018), with mid-level features like motion patterns, objects, and scene information being processed
in parallel before being integrated at the level of action semantics (Zimmermann et al., 2025).
Human brain dynamics in response to short dynamic stimuli (i.e., videos) are comparatively much
less explored. Using fMRI Lahner et al. (2024) found a hierarchical correspondence between action
recognition model layers and brain regions as in static images, also demonstrating different levels
of sensitivity to frame-shuffling and neural temporal correspondence to the video especially in early
visual cortex (EVC) - consistent with prior findings on the hierarchy of temporal receptive windows
(Hasson et al., 2008; Lerner et al., 2011). Additionally, work by Jung et al. (2025) showed that
high-level semantic action features uniquely explain activity over a widespread range of cortex dur-
ing dynamic natural vision, more so than semantic agent or scene features. A few works have used
EEG to investigate brain dynamics to natural videos using domain-specific social interaction videos;
Dima et al. (2022) found a temporal hierarchy of visual, action-related and social-affective features,
while McMahon et al. (2025) showed that mid and high-level social features are decodable at simi-
lar timings, using EEG-fMRI fusion. Using engine-rendered (naturalistic) short videos, Karapetian
et al. (2025) also found a temporal processing hierarchy and revealed that motion and action-related
features are processed faster during video than static frame presentation. However, large-scale nat-
ural video EEG datasets have been missing so far, limiting research on the fine-grained temporal
dynamics of real-world visual processing. In this work, we are diving in underexplored territory by
leveraging a newly collected, large-scale high temporal resolution EEG dataset for domain-general
(i.e. not social-specific) and natural (i.e. not rendered) dynamic stimuli.
Benchmarking model representational alignment on short-video fMRI. Very recent works have
focused on large-scale benchmarking of model-brain alignment for videos. Garcia et al. (2025)
used fMRI of short social interaction videos, comparing 8 video action recognition models with 348
image object recognition models. They found that image models captured representations in EVC
and the ventral stream, whereas video models outperformed in the lateral stream, linked to social
cognition. Sartzetaki et al. (2025), used fMRI of short domain-general videos, comparing 47 video
models, 41 image object recognition models and 11 image action recognition models to disentangle
temporal integration from classification task effects. Temporally-integrating models surpassed static
models in EVC, through better alignment of middle model layers, while action recognition models
surpassed object ones in later stage brain regions via classification layers. Tang et al. (2025), used 5
different video fMRI datasets and compared 92 models, including image object recognition models,
video action recognition models, multimodal models, and non-NN baselines. Through correlating
brain alignment with model zero-shot performance in different tasks, they found that appearance-
free (motion-only) action recognition and object recognition are the two most relevant tasks for brain
alignment, with task-agnostic self-supervised models performing best at both tasks and alignment.
Current studies are however all based on fMRI, precluding conclusions about fine-grained temporal
dynamics. Similarly on the model side, the temporally-evolving internal feature dimension remains
unexploited. In this work, we present the first large-scale investigation of model alignment with
highly dynamic brain representations recorded via EEG during short video viewing. Building on
the model set and axes of variation from Sartzetaki et al. (2025), we compare how different model
groups and their internal temporal representations align with the brain across processing time.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3
METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 shows an overview of our methodology for measuring alignment of models to dynamic
brain responses1. We base our methodology on Sartzetaki et al. (2025) but extend it in: (1) applying
it to an EEG instead of fMRI dataset, (2) expanding the model architectures sampled, (3) unfolding
the temporal dimension of the extracted model features and (4) proposing a temporal extension to
the representational alignment metric. We describe these aspects in the next three sections.
3.1
CROSS-TEMPORAL REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSIS (CT-RSA)
Neural network models compute representations at subsampled frame intervals, while the mapping
of specific frames onto brain responses is uncertain, raising the question of how to align model and
brain representations over time. We extend Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA) (Kriegesko-
rte et al., 2008) to compare all temporally unfolded model features with all EEG timepoints without
imposing assumptions about the relationship between the two, performing a cross-temporal match-
ing that identifies the maximally aligning model timepoint at each EEG timepoint. Such cross-
temporal matching also allows studying dynamic prediction (de Vries & Wurm, 2023) and temporal
generalization (King & Dehaene, 2014). We choose to build on RSA to perform a multivariate
analysis that benchmarks emergent brain alignment of model representations. 2
Temporal Representational Dissimilarity Matrices. (A) EEG. At each EEG timepoint tN we
create a super-subject brain Representational Dissimilarity Matrix (RDM) (BtN ), using a particular
electrode subset with repetition-average channel vectors vs−tN for each participant (subject) s. We
compute the super-subject RDM by averaging the RDMs of all subjects at that timepoint, as BtN =
avgs(Bs−tN ), Bij
s−tN = 1 −r(vi
s−tN , vj
s−tN ), ∀i, j(i < j), 0 ≤j < K, 0 ≤tN < N where
K is the total number of videos and r is Pearson correlation. (B) Models. We flatten the features
of each model layer l and timepoint tM into a one-dimensional feature vector of length CxHxW,
and reduce its dimensionality using Sparse Random Projection followed by Principal Component
Analysis to 100 Principal Components to obtain fl−tM . We compute one RDM per model layer and
model time-point as M ij
l−tM = 1 −r(f i
l−tM , f j
l−tM ), ∀i, j(i < j), 0 ≤j < K, 0 ≤tM < M.
Cross-Temporal correlation of RDMs. To calculate the cross-temporal representational align-
ment score between the model and EEG timecourses of RDMs, we first compute Spearman’s ρ
for all combinations of model and EEG timepoints for each layer Rl−tMtN = ρ(BtN , Ml−tM ).
We then choose the highest-correlating model layer and model timepoint per EEG timepoint
RtN = maxl−tM (Rl−tMtN ). This maximization is essential to retrieve insights from approxi-
mately 1k RSA scores that result from all combinations of model layers and timepoints. Over all
EEG timepoints, electrode subsets, and models, this allows us to handle over 107 RSA scores.
Noise ceiling computation. Because of individual subject variability in brain data, noise ceilings for
each electrode subset are computed to compare model RSA scores against the maximum obtainable
score given the inter-subject variability, following standard approaches in the field (Nili et al., 2014).
For the lower noise ceiling (LNC) we compute a mean RDM across all subjects except one. Then we
take the Spearman correlation of the left-out subject RDM and mean RDM, repeat for all the subjects
and calculate the average. For the upper noise ceiling (UNC) we take the mean of all RDMs without
removing subjects, compute the Spearman correlation of each subject RDM with the mean RDM,
and average. The UNC signifies perfect correlation for the amount of noise in the data, often referred
to as the maximum amount of variance that can be explained. All further reported alignment scores
are scaled by the UNC, and so is the LNC.
Statistical significance. To test if model RDMs correlated significantly with the brain RDMs, we
performed permutation tests (Nili et al., 2014), in similar fashion as done in Sartzetaki et al. (2025).
For each model RDM at every EEG timepoint we select the model RDM for highest-correlating
layer and model timepoint pair and permute rows and columns 10000 times using the same 10000
random permutations. We then calculate a null distribution per EEG timepoint by computing the
Spearman correlations of all permuted RDMs with the brain RDM. For significance of a group of
1Due to licensing restrictions of the stimuli used in the brain dataset, the video frames shown in the figure
are sourced from representative videos captured by the authors themselves and are not subject to copyright.
2We incorporate CT-RSA in the Net2Brain python library (Bersch et al., 2025), see recent release at
https://github.com/cvai-roig-lab/Net2Brain.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
models against zero, we perform a two-tailed sign test between the average null distribution of all
models in the group and the average observed Spearman correlation, corrected by subtracting the
average observed Spearman correlation before stimulus onset, to account for inflated pre-stimulus
correlation scores arising from the maximization inherent to our CT-RSA method. To test for sig-
nificant differences between two groups of models, we perform a two-tailed sign test between the
null distribution created from the across-group differences in the within-group average distributions,
and the observed difference in the average of the two model groups’ Spearman correlations. When
showing group medians instead of means, the above statistical inferences are performed on the me-
dians. All statistical inferences are corrected for multiple comparisons across time points using FDR
correction (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) with a cluster threshold of two consecutive time points.
3.2
VIDEO MODELS
We expand upon the original set of 99 video models as used in Sartzetaki et al. (2025) to addition-
ally reflect changes in the current state-of-the-art, such as the introduction of state-space models
(SSMs) as a scalable linear-complexity alternative to Transformers (Gu & Dao, 2024), for both
static vision (Zhu et al., 2024) and video (Li et al., 2024). With the addition of 3 VisionMamba
object recognition and 8 VideoMamba action recognition models, our final set of models includes
44 image models trained for object recognition on ImageNet, 10 image models trained for action
recognition on Kinetics 400, and 49 video models trained for action recognition on Kinetics 400.
Image action models are trained on videos but treat time in a trivial way (separate computations per
frame). An additional set of 7 models trained for action recognition on other datasets (Kinetics 710
and Something-Something-v2) was also evaluated, bringing the total to 110 computer vision models
tested overall. Comprehensive and extended lists of models can be found in Appendix B.
Temporally unfolded feature extraction. Since the models process a fixed number of frames at a
given sampling rate, each video is divided into S sub-clips of length T, differing per specific model.
For each layer, we extract features of shape (T, C, H, W) from each sub-clip, and unfold the temporal
dimension to obtain TxS=M model timepoint features of shape (C, H, W). We extract features from
all higher-level blocks in the models and include the final classification layer.
3.3
EEG DATASET
We utilize the newly collected EEG Moments Dataset (EEGMD), an EEG-based extension of the
large scale video fMRI BOLD Moments Dataset (BMD) (Lahner et al., 2024). EEGMD covers
the exact same set of 1102 short (3s) natural videos from Moments in Time (Monfort et al., 2019;
2021). See Appendix A for more information on EEG acquisition. The dataset consists of EEG
recordings of 6 participants for a “train set” of 1000 videos with 6 repeats per video and a “test set”
of 102 videos with 24 repeats, using a set-up of 128 electrodes. Data was recorded at a sampling
rate of 1000 Hz with online filtering (between 0.1 Hz and 100 Hz) and rereferenced (to Fz). In
the current analysis we use the test set for the application of RSA, as signal to noise ratio is higher
due the greater number of stimulus repetitions to average across (see decoding results in Appendix
C Fig. 6), similar to Sartzetaki et al. (2025). The test set videos are representative of the whole
dataset, covering a wide range of objects, actions and scenes (for more elaborate description of the
video contents see Lahner et al. (2024)). All main analyses are based on the group-average level;
we provide additional supplementary results for subject level analyses in Appendix C Fig. 9.
Preprocessing and electrode selections We performed offline preprocessing using Python and
MNE (Gramfort et al., 2013). The continuous EEG data was epoched into trials from -0.2s to 3.5s
with respect to stimulus onset, baseline-corrected by subtracting the mean of the pre-stimulus period
separately for each trial and channel, and temporally downsampled to 50 Hz. Next, we performed
multivariate noise normalisation (MVNN) based on the covariance matrices of each timepoint to
reweigh (un)reliable sensors and to (de)emphasise specific spatial frequencies, as recommended
for multivariate analyses such as RSA (Guggenmos et al., 2018). Our analyses are based on two
electrode partitions. First, we select posterior electrodes (35), which overlay visual cortex and are
commonly used in vision studies (Xie et al., 2020; Seijdel et al., 2021; Loke et al., 2024). To make
a coarse distinction between the opposite ends of the brain’s spatial organization, we select a second
partition of frontal electrodes (54), covering (pre)frontal cortex associated with executive functions.
The inclusion of frontal electrodes is an exploratory choice, further motivated by the lack of prior
knowledge on the localization of visual processing during longer timescales (video). See Appendix
A for the names of all included electrodes.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Posterior Electrodes
Frontal Electrodes
Image Models (ImageNet-1k)
Image Models (Kinetics-400)
Video Models (Kinetics-400)
Time (seconds)
Time (seconds)
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
I
video on
video oﬀ
video on
video oﬀ
video on
video oﬀ
video on
video oﬀ
a
c
b
Figure 2: (Left) Task and temporal integration types dynamically interchange in posterior electrodes.
(Right) Action task specificity is early and stable in frontal electrodes. Row (a) shows the maximum
score over all model timepoints and layers (group average), with significance marked by squares
(against zero) and two-colored circles (pairwise), while (b) and (c) show the layer and timepoint that
yield the scores. Processing stages I-IV are identified and LNCs are outlined in gray background.
4
RESULTS
We assess brain alignment over time for 110 deep neural networks using CT-RSA, considering four
main axes of variation: temporal integration, classification task, architecture, and pretraining.
Task and temporal integration types dynamically interchange in posterior electrodes. In Fig. 2
(Left: Posterior) we compare models across the whole EEG time-course by varying (1) the temporal
integration, i.e. image (static) v.s. video (temporally-integrating) models, and (2) the classification
task, i.e. object (ImageNet-1k) v.s. action recognition (Kinetics-400) models. RSA scores (Fig. 2a)
in all model groups are significant against zero from 0.08s, extending to the duration of the whole
video and offset. Based on visual inspection of the development of these scores, we distinguish four
temporal stages of processing: (I) 0.06s - 0.24s, (II) 0.24s - 0.8s, (III) 0.8s - 2s and (IV) 2s - 3s. To
summarize the results of these different stages and explore model variation, we additionally evaluate
bin-averaged scores in Fig. 3. We next discuss these stages in turn, simultaneously interpreting the
score (Fig. 2a/3a) and the best model layer (Fig. 2b/3b) that gives rise to it. First in stage I, scores
peak for all model groups at 0.14s and image models significantly outperform video models, with
the best model being AlexNet. For all model groups this high correspondence can be accounted for
by relatively early model layers (below 0.5), and as the peak in scores decays, by progressively later
layers. This suggests that during this stage, posterior processing reflects static low-level information,
independent of task. In stage II, object recognition models show a clear peak, outperforming the
other model groups; the best model here is a DenseNet. In contrast with stage I, the significant
scores for all model groups are due to late layers, primarily relating posterior processing at this
stage to static high-level object information. During stage III, we observe a steady decrease in
image model scores, while the score for video models increases and then remains relatively stable,
before dropping towards the end of the stage. This leads to video models outranking the other groups
(best model being MViT-v2), with scores being driven by mid-level layers. Thus, overall stage III
can be summarized as a mid-level temporally-integrative action processing stage. During stage IV,
scores and layer depth across all model groups remain stable after reaching their lowest point, with
video models less significantly outperforming image models than in stage III. Looking across stages
in Fig. 2b/3b, action recognition model scores correspond to an earlier layer than object recognition
ones in stages I and III, with less clear patterns in the other stages.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
I
II
III
IV
AlexNet
DenseNet
VideoMamba
MViT-v2
MViT-v2
I
II
III
IV
Image Models 
(ImageNet-1k)
Image Models 
(Kinetics-400)
Video Models 
(Kinetics-400)
TSN-DenseNet
TSM-MobileOne
Posterior Electrodes
Frontal Electrodes
a
c
b
Figure 3: Bin-averaged results showing model variability within each of the temporal processing
stages in Fig. 2, outlining best-aligned models in row (a). Significance is marked by a star at y = 0
(against zero) and by the respective number of stars for p < 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 on top (pairwise).
The best model timepoint (Fig. 2c/3c) reveals a strong correspondence between model and EEG
timepoints in posterior electrodes: early EEG timepoints best correspond to early model timepoints
(close to 0), and later EEG timepoints to gradually later model timepoints (yet only up to ∼0.6),
highlighting the temporality of posterior neural responses. Note also that where layer depth is high
(stage II), the match in model timepoint is less strict.
The analysis demonstrates that posterior processing during video perception is highly temporal,
progressing through distinct stages that emphasize different representational demands. An early
peak around 0.14s reflects low to mid-level static processing, followed by a rapid shift toward higher-
level static object representations. Beyond this point, posterior parts of the brain gradually transition
into mid-level temporally-integrative action processing, marking the late stages of video perception.
Action task specificity is early and stable in frontal electrodes. In Fig. 2/3 (Right: Frontal) we
show results for the frontal partition. We observe that most neural processing of video information
occurs in stages I and II, as model groups show no significant alignment scores afterwards. Scores
in this period show two peaks for all model groups, at 0.24s and 0.5s, with static action recognition
models significantly outperforming the other groups at the last peak. This results from correspon-
dence with late model layers. Regarding the best model timepoint (Fig. 2c/3c) and in contrast to
posterior electrodes, we see that in frontal electrodes, during the period of significant scores, there
is no clear temporal correspondence between model and EEG timepoints - with large spread across
models (Fig. 3c). These results suggest that during video perception, neural processing reflected
in frontal electrodes shows limited temporality and is primarily engaged until 0.8s with high-level,
action-related information that is largely independent of within-video dynamics.
Context window and sampling rate influence alignment in late posterior processing. In Fig. 8
we show the effects of model context window length (num. of frames) and sampling rate (fps) on
brain alignment. We observe a significant positive correlation between these factors and posterior
brain alignment for temporally integrating models during stages III and IV, during which temporally
integrating models also show the highest alignment (Fig. 2a/3a). These findings reinforce the notion
that late-stage posterior processing of videos relies on temporal integration, with larger temporal
context windows and higher temporal resolution enhancing alignment.
State-space video models best capture mid-level intermediate posterior processing. In Fig. 4
we compare brain-alignment of different architectures, i.e. CNNs, Transformers, or SSMs, focusing
on the stages I-IV identified in the previous sections. To avoid confounds from task or temporal inte-
gration, we focus this analysis on video action recognition models. SSMs are the most brain-aligned
to posterior channels in stages I-II, especially in stage II, and through earlier layers (mid-depth).
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
UNC-scaled ρ
Layer depth
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
CNNs
Transformers
State Space Models
Posterior Electrodes
Frontal Electrodes
a
b
Figure 4: Architecture variation in bin-averaged scores for each stage. (Left) Video SSMs best
capture mid-level intermediate posterior processing. (Right) CNNs give a slight edge in alignment
to high-level frontal processing.
Additionally in stage I, Transformers are significantly better aligned than CNNs. In frontal channels
CNNs are most brain-aligned in stages I-II via late layers, however, only with marginal difference
to Transformers. In stages III and IV of both channel sets differences are mostly not significant.
In App. C we show additional comparisons that a) control for model pretraining (Fig. 10), and
b) compare between object recognition instead of video action recognition models (Fig. 12). The
effects of architecture are stable across pretraining types, but differences between object recognition
models are more muted. Specifically, static object SSMs do not show the observed advantage for
video SSMs in posterior stage II. This suggests that SSMs capture a distinct component of neural
processing in posterior channels during phase II, previously linked to static high-level object rep-
resentation, through temporally-integrative mid-level action features. Overall, these results show
a disadvantage of CNNs in early processing and an advantage of SSMs in intermediate posterior
processing. Considering their architectural differences to Transformers, the CNN disadvantage sug-
gests global attention is useful for early alignment, while the SSM advantage suggests recurrent
processing benefits alignment to subsequent intermediate responses. This latter advantage appears
more related to recurrency across time than across patches, as for static SSMs it does not persist.
Self-supervised to no pretraining switch in posterior electrodes. In Fig. 5 we compare the
brain alignment of video action recognition models having different types of pretraining, either no
pretraining, supervised pretraining on images (object recognition), supervised pretraining on videos
(action recognition), or self-supervised pretraining on videos. We observe that in stages I-II of the
posterior electrodes self-supervised pretraining achieves superior brain alignment. In stage I it is on
par with pretraining on image object recognition, while in stage II it is superior to all other types. In
stage III, no pretraining is significantly better than all other types. In stage IV in posterior and in all
stages in frontal electrodes, significant differences are less consistent, with only a slight advantage of
supervised video pretraining in frontal. We again further control for the model architecture in App.
C Fig. 13, and find that the advantages of self-supervised pretraining in stage II and no pretraining
in stage III are robust across architectures. A conclusion we could draw from this analysis, is that
the advantage of self-supervised pretraining in the primarily “object processing” stage relates to
self-supervision enabling generalization to other tasks (through task-general pretraining objectives
like spatiotemporal patch reconstruction), while the benefit of no pretraining in the temporally-
integrative stage reflects avoiding the shortcut learning of unrelated patterns that is common during
pretraining (Byvshev et al., 2022). We additionally compare action recognition fine-tuning datasets
(Sth-Sth-v2, K710), showing no effects on alignment at any stage or partition (App. C Figs. 14-15)).
No pretraining
Object-supervised on images
Action-supervised on videos
Self-supervised on videos
UNC-scaled Spearman’s rho
Posterior
Frontal
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
Figure 5: Pretraining variation in bin-averaged scores for each stage. (Left) Switch of benefit from
self-supervised (stage II) to no pretraining (stage III) in posterior electrodes. (Right) Slight advan-
tage of supervised video pretraining in frontal electrodes.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this work we performed a large-scale model comparison of both static and temporally-integrating
deep neural networks to dynamic EEG recordings. Using CT-RSA we make the following main
observations: (1) Neural processing during video perception in posterior parts of the brain is highly
temporal and unfolds in distinct stages, best captured by different type of representations: from an
initial alignment with static low-level features, to mid- and high-level object features, and finally
to mid-level temporally integrative action features. (2) In contrast, neural processing during video
perception in frontal parts of the brain shows restricted temporality and is best aligned with static
high-level action features early in the video. (3) Architecture-wise, temporally-integrating action
SSMs best capture mid-level representations in posterior electrodes, reflecting a different component
of the response in the primarily object-related stage, while indicating potential benefits of global
attention and recurrent temporal processing for alignment to early-intermediate responses. (4) Self-
supervised pretraining helps capture brain representations in the early, primarily object-related stage,
while performing no pretraining captures brain representations of later more temporally-integrative
stages, indicating independent benefits of general pretext tasks and unbiased target domain features.
What we learn by moving to dynamic natural stimuli. Moving from static images to more real
world dynamic videos, we find similarities and differences in neural processing between these two
formats. Congruent with the works of Bankson et al. (2018), Greene & Hansen (2020) and Zim-
mermann et al. (2025) in the domain of image perception, we find a temporal hierarchy of object
and action features in posterior processing, but only within the duration of stages I and II, i.e. the
first 500 ms of processing, consistent with the stimulus durations in those studies. Our findings are
also largely consistent with prior work on the neural dynamics of short videos showing a temporal
hierarchy of (social) action-related features (Dima et al., 2022; McMahon et al., 2025; Karapetian
et al., 2025), where low and high level object features emerge earlier than action features. However,
as we extend beyond the timescales used in these studies (beyond 1s) we discover that mid-level
temporally-integrative action features are most brain-aligned until the end of the video, challenging
the notion of a strict temporal hierarchy. The critical role of temporal integration during this late-
stage processing is further highlighted by the observed increase in alignment with larger context
windows and higher temporal resolution. Notably, this sustained alignment occurs consequently
after the peak in alignment with regards to static high-level action features in frontal areas, raising
the possibility that feedback from frontal to posterior regions may contribute to shaping later stages
of visual processing of dynamic action information. Multiple studies have posed that during ob-
ject recognition in static context feedback information from prefrontal cortex to posterior regions is
critical in shaping behaviorally sufficient object representations, especially under challenging con-
ditions (Goddard et al., 2016; Kar & DiCarlo, 2021; Oyarzo et al., 2025). Specifically, Oyarzo et al.
(2025) pose frontal cortex plays a corrective role under these conditions, reshaping high-level vi-
sual representations to resolve ambiguity. If we extrapolate, video processing can be viewed as a
more demanding extension of static image processing. This increased complexity may explain the
recruitment of frontal activity, which appears to contribute early on, followed by a reconfiguration
of representations in posterior activity for updated mid-level feature processing.
What we learn from using dynamic brain measurements for benchmarking. Compared to prior
work on video fMRI alignment benchmarking (Sartzetaki et al., 2025), which found high alignment
of temporally-integrating video models through mid-layers in EVC, we find an advantage for these
model features now temporally localized in stages III and IV, i.e. from 0.8s and onwards, in the
posterior part of the brain, following initial alignment with high-level object model layers. Com-
bining the insights from both studies, we hypothesize that mid-level dynamic processing could be
performed by the EVC after the initial encoding of the video appearance. The high alignment of
action recognition models reported in high-level visual cortex by Sartzetaki et al. (2025) was also
observed in the current study, but in the frontal electrode partition, likely reflecting an even higher-
level cortical stage of processing, during stage II (0.24s–0.8 s). Additionally, leveraging the temporal
resolution of EEG, we find that object representations also contribute to video processing in the pos-
terior part of the brain, being the most predictive during early processing but rather briefly, before
the processing of dynamic features. A hypothesis for the absence of object contribution in fMRI
alignment for video is that, relative to the whole video time-course, object features are processed
only briefly, and this transient signal is lost in the aggregation of the fMRI response. Similarly, the
enhanced alignment with static processing during stage I (0.06s-0.024s) in posterior electrodes may
be too brief to appear in the fMRI signal. We can also compare our results for the other factors
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
of variation that study explored, namely architecture (without SSMs) and training dataset. For ar-
chitecture they showed CNNs and Transformers being overall equivalent in fMRI, with differences
only in which layer was best aligned; in CNNs the best aligning layer was a later layer (≈0.6) than
in Transformers (≈0.2), primarily in EVC. Here we mostly find the same; CNNs and Transform-
ers align overall similarly apart from posterior stage I which shows a strong overall advantage for
Transfomers, and in posterior stages II, III, IV (especially II), the best aligning layer is a later layer
in CNNs than in Transformers. In our results, this trend also continues in frontal electrodes. For
training dataset, the fMRI study showed a disadvantage of ego-centric datasets in alignment to face-
processing brain regions, whereas we find no differences in alignment to EEG (Appendix C Fig.
14), most probably due to the lack of fine-grained spatial resolution.
Prospects for model building. Our findings suggest that during video perception the brain per-
forms computations that are not best represented by any single model during the entire EEG time-
course, but rather by alternating semantic tasks and temporal integration strategies, resembling a
dynamic mixture of expert models. This type of neural processing is also corroborated by studies
of non-visual, higher cognitive systems like reasoning and the multiple demand system, with Mix-
ture of Experts (MoE) models matching established brain pathways (Cook et al., 2025; AlKhamissi
et al., 2025). We propose (1) that a single model could be best aligned to the whole time-course
if it was trained on a sufficiently general objective (e.g. self-supervised masked modeling) so that
it can develop experts for object and action recognition, and for temporally-integrating vs. static
processing (2) that dynamically switching between those experts is a design choice with potential
for human-like capabilities (e.g. efficiency). Regarding (1), preliminary results on a single model
(VideoMamba, App. C Fig. 16) show that pure self-supervision does yield the highest alignment in
stages I and II (potentially due to the general objective, as in Tang et al. (2025)), but is surpassed by
the fine-tuned version at later processing stages, suggesting a further need for supervised training.
Concerning (2), this dynamic switching might prove limited in block-based (i.e. CNN/Transformer)
video models, as they process videos in fixed temporal blocks; any dynamic switching could then
only occur within these time spans. Architectures better suited to support this property are recurrent
neural networks (e.g. SSMs) as they process input sequentially, continuously updating their hidden
states. Dynamic switching could then emerge implicitly or be enforced, potentially reducing com-
putational costs via keeping overall network activation low, or using feedback connections to make
use of prior experts. This exemplifies the potential of brain alignment for model building, inviting
the machine learning and cognitive neuroscience communities to think again in a more unified way
through the search of common core principles in both engineering and biological solutions.
Application prospects of CT-RSA. The usage of CT-RSA is not limited to the current setting. In
principle, the method generalizes to any setting that involves comparing two forms of temporal, or
rather sequential, representations. On the model side, this could be multimodal audiovisual and
language representations across time (e.g. Gifford et al. (2024)), either from separate unimodal
DNNs or multimodal DNNs, supporting analyses on when exactly in time multimodally integrative
neural processing occurs rather than unimodal processing. On the neural side, it could likewise
extend to long-format fMRI time series or other sequential neural measurements. For example in
the set up of d’Ascoli et al. (2025), encoding could be replaced with CT-RSA as an option for
exploring the inherent temporal model-brain alignment instead of maximizing neural predictivity.
Related forms of cross-temporal matching have been used to study dynamic prediction (de Vries &
Wurm, 2023) and temporal generalization (King & Dehaene, 2014) of representations.
Limitations and future work. While our setup involved 100+ models, extending Sartzetaki et al.
(2025), specific model types should be investigated in more depth, such as purely self-supervised
models and models with different types of recurrent mechanisms (SSMs, LRUs, RNNs). Addition-
ally, fine-grained differences between video models can be further explored by using, instead of a
coarse top-down grouping, a bottom-up grouping that focuses on variations in temporal feature gen-
eralization. Another exciting direction is collecting neural data with intermediate duration videos
(10-20s) that could include elements of visual surprise, camera changes, or scene cuts. Lastly, given
the limited spatial resolution of EEG, our ability to draw conclusions about the precise spatiotem-
poral dynamics is constrained. To more directly assess whether, when and how the prefrontal cortex
could be involved in the neural processing of videos, a promising direction for future work would
be to employ model based EEG–fMRI fusion (Hebart et al., 2018; Cichy & Oliva, 2020; Cichy
et al., 2014), combining the current EEGMD with BMD (Lahner et al., 2024) and leveraging the the
complementary spatial and temporal resolution of these different brain measurements.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CS is supported by an ELLIS Amsterdam Unit grant to IIAG. AWZ acknowledges support from the
UvA Data Science Centre, as part of the Human Aligned Video AI Lab.
REFERENCES
Badr AlKhamissi, C Nicol`o De Sabbata, Greta Tuckute, Zeming Chen, Martin Schrimpf, and An-
toine Bosselut. Mixture of cognitive reasoners: Modular reasoning with brain-like specialization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13331, 2025.
Emily J Allen, Ghislain St-Yves, Yihan Wu, Jesse L Breedlove, Jacob S Prince, Logan T Dowdle,
Matthias Nau, Brad Caron, Franco Pestilli, Ian Charest, et al. A massive 7t fmri dataset to bridge
cognitive neuroscience and artificial intelligence. Nature Neuroscience, 25(1):116–126, 2022.
Piyush Nitin Bagad and Andrew Zisserman. Chirality in action: Time-aware video representation
learning by latent straightening. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025.
Brett B Bankson, Martin N Hebart, Iris IA Groen, and Chris I Baker.
The temporal evolution
of conceptual object representations revealed through models of behavior, semantics and deep
neural networks. NeuroImage, 178:172–182, 2018.
Jan Benda. Neural adaptation. Current Biology, 31(3):R110–R116, 2021.
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological),
57(1):289–300, 1995.
Domenic Bersch, Martina G Vilas, Sari Saba-Sadiya, Timothy Schauml¨offel, Kshitij Dwivedi,
Christina Sartzetaki, Radoslaw M Cichy, and Gemma Roig. Net2brain: A toolbox to compare
artificial vision models with human brain responses. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 19:1515873,
2025.
Amber M Brands, Sasha Devore, Orrin Devinsky, Werner Doyle, Adeen Flinker, Daniel Friedman,
Patricia Dugan, Jonathan Winawer, and Iris IA Groen. Temporal dynamics of short-term neural
adaptation across human visual cortex. PLoS Computational Biology, 20(5):e1012161, 2024.
Petr Byvshev, Pascal Mettes, and Yu Xiao. Are 3d convolutional networks inherently biased towards
appearance? Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 220:103437, 2022.
Joao Carreira, Eric Noland, Chloe Hillier, and Andrew Zisserman. A short note on the kinetics-700
human action dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06987, 2019.
Radoslaw M Cichy and Aude Oliva. Am/eeg-fmri fusion primer: resolving human brain responses
in space and time. Neuron, 107(5):772–781, 2020.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Dimitrios Pantazis, and Aude Oliva. Resolving human object recognition
in space and time. Nature Neuroscience, 17(3):455–462, 2014.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Aditya Khosla, Dimitrios Pantazis, Antonio Torralba, and Aude Oliva.
Comparison of deep neural networks to spatio-temporal cortical dynamics of human visual object
recognition reveals hierarchical correspondence. Scientific Reports, 6(1):27755, 2016.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Gemma Roig, Alex Andonian, Kshitij Dwivedi, Benjamin Lahner, Alex
Lascelles, Yalda Mohsenzadeh, Kandan Ramakrishnan, and Aude Oliva. The algonauts project:
A platform for communication between the sciences of biological and artificial intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.05675, 2019.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Kshitij Dwivedi, Benjamin Lahner, Alex Lascelles, Polina Iamshchinina,
Monika Graumann, Alex Andonian, NAR Murty, K Kay, Gemma Roig, et al. The algonauts
project 2021 challenge: How the human brain makes sense of a world in motion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.13714, 2021.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Colin Conwell, Jacob S Prince, Kendrick N Kay, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. A large-scale
examination of inductive biases shaping high-level visual representation in brains and machines.
Nature Communications, 15(1):9383, 2024.
Jack Cook, Danyal Akarca, Rui Ponte Costa, and Jascha Achterberg. Brain-like processing pathways
form in models with heterogeneous experts. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2025.
St´ephane d’Ascoli, J´er´emy Rapin, Yohann Benchetrit, Hubert Banville, and Jean-R´emi King.
Tribe:
Trimodal brain encoder for whole-brain fmri response prediction.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.22229, 2025.
Stephen V David, William E Vinje, and Jack L Gallant. Natural stimulus statistics alter the receptive
field structure of v1 neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 24(31):6991–7006, 2004.
Ingmar EJ de Vries and Moritz F Wurm. Predictive neural representations of naturalistic dynamic
input. Nature Communications, 14(1):3858, 2023.
Diana C Dima, Tyler M Tomita, Christopher J Honey, and Leyla Isik. Social-affective features drive
human representations of observed actions. Elife, 11:e75027, 2022.
Adrien Doerig, Rowan P Sommers, Katja Seeliger, Blake Richards, Jenann Ismael, Grace W Lind-
say, Konrad P Kording, Talia Konkle, Marcel AJ Van Gerven, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, et al. The
neuroconnectionist research programme. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 24(7):431–450, 2023.
Nadiya El-Sourani, Moritz F Wurm, Ima Trempler, Gereon R Fink, and Ricarda I Schubotz. Making
sense of objects lying around: How contextual objects shape brain activity during action observa-
tion. NeuroImage, 167:429–437, 2018.
Kathy Garcia, Emalie McMahon, Colin Conwell, Michael Bonner, and Leyla Isik. Modeling dy-
namic social vision highlights gaps between deep learning and humans. In The Thirteenth Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Alessandro T Gifford, Benjamin Lahner, Sari Saba-Sadiya, Martina G Vilas, Alex Lascelles, Aude
Oliva, Kendrick Kay, Gemma Roig, and Radoslaw M Cichy. The algonauts project 2023 chal-
lenge: How the human brain makes sense of natural scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03198,
2023.
Alessandro T Gifford, Domenic Bersch, Marie St-Laurent, Basile Pinsard, Julie Boyle, Lune Bellec,
Aude Oliva, Gemma Roig, and Radoslaw M Cichy. The algonauts project 2025 challenge: How
the human brain makes sense of multimodal movies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00504, 2024.
Erin Goddard, Thomas A Carlson, Nadene Dermody, and Alexandra Woolgar. Representational
dynamics of object recognition: Feedforward and feedback information flows. NeuroImage, 128:
385–397, 2016.
Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne West-
phal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al.
The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5842–5850, 2017.
Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A Engemann, Daniel Strohmeier, Christian
Brodbeck, Roman Goj, Mainak Jas, Teon Brooks, Lauri Parkkonen, et al. Meg and eeg data
analysis with mne-python. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 7:267, 2013.
Michelle R Greene and Bruce C Hansen. Disentangling the independent contributions of visual and
conceptual features to the spatiotemporal dynamics of scene categorization. Journal of Neuro-
science, 40(27):5283–5299, 2020.
Iris IA Groen, Sennay Ghebreab, Hielke Prins, Victor AF Lamme, and H Steven Scholte. From
image statistics to scene gist: evoked neural activity reveals transition from low-level natural
image structure to scene category. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(48):18814–18824, 2013.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. In First
Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Umut G¨uc¸l¨u and Marcel AJ Van Gerven. Deep neural networks reveal a gradient in the complexity of
neural representations across the ventral stream. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(27):10005–10014,
2015.
Matthias Guggenmos, Philipp Sterzer, and Radoslaw Martin Cichy. Multivariate pattern analysis for
meg: A comparison of dissimilarity measures. NeuroImage, 173:434–447, 2018.
Uri Hasson, Eunice Yang, Ignacio Vallines, David J Heeger, and Nava Rubin. A hierarchy of tem-
poral receptive windows in human cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 28(10):2539–2550, 2008.
Martin N Hebart, Brett B Bankson, Assaf Harel, Chris I Baker, and Radoslaw M Cichy. The repre-
sentational dynamics of task and object processing in humans. Elife, 7:e32816, 2018.
Martin N Hebart, Oliver Contier, Lina Teichmann, Adam H Rockter, Charles Y Zheng, Alexis Kid-
der, Anna Corriveau, Maryam Vaziri-Pashkam, and Chris I Baker. Things-data, a multimodal
collection of large-scale datasets for investigating object representations in human brain and be-
havior. Elife, 12:e82580, 2023.
Olivier J H´enaff, Robbe LT Goris, and Eero P Simoncelli. Perceptual straightening of natural videos.
Nature Neuroscience, 22(6):984–991, 2019.
Heejung Jung, Xiaochun Han, Ma Feilong, Jane Han, Deepanshi Shokeen, Cara Van Uden, Isabella
Hanson, Andrew C Connolly, James V Haxby, and Samuel A Nastase. Action features dominate
cortical representation during natural vision. bioRxiv, pp. 2025–01, 2025.
Kohitij Kar and James J DiCarlo. Fast recurrent processing via ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is
needed by the primate ventral stream for robust core visual object recognition. Neuron, 109(1):
164–176, 2021.
Agnessa Karapetian, Alexander Lenders, Vanshika Bawa, Martin Pflaum, Raphael Leuner, Gemma
Roig, Kshitij Dwivedi, and Radoslaw M Cichy. Investigating the temporal dynamics and mod-
elling of mid-level feature representations in humans. bioRxiv, pp. 2025–03, 2025.
Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijaya-
narasimhan, Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics human action
video dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950, 2017.
Jean-R´emi King and Stanislas Dehaene. Characterizing the dynamics of mental representations: the
temporal generalization method. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(4):203–210, 2014.
Talia Konkle and George Alvarez. Cognitive steering in deep neural networks via long-range mod-
ulatory feedback connections. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:21613–
21634, 2023.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte and Pamela K Douglas. Cognitive computational neuroscience. Nature Neu-
roscience, 21(9):1148–1160, 2018.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
connecting the branches of systems neuroscience.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2:249,
2008.
Benjamin Lahner, Kshitij Dwivedi, Polina Iamshchinina, Monika Graumann, Alex Lascelles,
Gemma Roig, Alessandro Thomas Gifford, Bowen Pan, SouYoung Jin, N Apurva Ratan Murty,
et al. Modeling short visual events through the bold moments video fmri dataset and metadata.
Nature Communications, 15(1):6241, 2024.
Yulia Lerner, Christopher J Honey, Lauren J Silbert, and Uri Hasson. Topographic mapping of a
hierarchy of temporal receptive windows using a narrated story. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(8):
2906–2915, 2011.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Kunchang Li, Xinhao Li, Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Videomamba:
State space model for efficient video understanding. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 237–255. Springer, 2024.
Jessica Loke, Noor Seijdel, Lukas Snoek, Lynn KA S¨orensen, Ron van de Klundert, Matthew van der
Meer, Eva Quispel, Natalie Cappaert, and H Steven Scholte. Human visual cortex and deep convo-
lutional neural network care deeply about object background. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
36(3):551–566, 2024.
Zejin Lu, Adrien Doerig, Victoria Bosch, Bas Krahmer, Daniel Kaiser, Radoslaw M Cichy, and
Tim C Kietzmann. End-to-end topographic networks as models of cortical map formation and
human visual behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, pp. 1–17, 2025a.
Zejin Lu, Sushrut Thorat, Radoslaw M Cichy, and Tim C Kietzmann. Adopting a human develop-
mental visual diet yields robust, shape-based ai vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03168, 2025b.
Emalie McMahon, Elizabeth Jiwon Im, Michael Bonner, and Leyla Isik. A spatiotemporal hierarchy
for social interaction perception in the lateral visual stream. OSF Preprints, 2025.
Mathew Monfort, Alex Andonian, Bolei Zhou, Kandan Ramakrishnan, Sarah Adel Bargal, Tom
Yan, Lisa Brown, Quanfu Fan, Dan Gutfreund, Carl Vondrick, et al. Moments in time dataset:
one million videos for event understanding. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 42(2):502–508, 2019.
Mathew Monfort, Bowen Pan, Kandan Ramakrishnan, Alex Andonian, Barry A McNamara, Alex
Lascelles, Quanfu Fan, Dan Gutfreund, Rog´erio Schmidt Feris, and Aude Oliva. Multi-moments
in time: Learning and interpreting models for multi-action video understanding. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(12):9434–9445, 2021.
Omer Moussa, Dietrich Klakow, and Mariya Toneva. Improving semantic understanding in speech
language models via brain-tuning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2025.
Lukas Muttenthaler, Klaus Greff, Frieda Born, Bernhard Spitzer, Simon Kornblith, Michael C
Mozer, Klaus-Robert M¨uller, Thomas Unterthiner, and Andrew K Lampinen. Aligning machine
and human visual representations across abstraction levels. Nature, 647(8089):349–355, 2025.
Hamed Nili, Cai Wingfield, Alexander Walther, Li Su, William Marslen-Wilson, and Nikolaus
Kriegeskorte. A toolbox for representational similarity analysis. PLoS Computational Biology,
10(4):e1003553, 2014.
Marc R Nuwer, Giancarlo Comi, Ronald Emerson, Anders Fuglsang-Frederiksen, Jean-Michel
Gu´erit, Hermann Hinrichs, Akio Ikeda, Fransisco Jose C Luccas, and Peter Rappelsburger. Ifcn
standards for digital recording of clinical eeg. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysi-
ology, 106(3):259–261, 1998.
Pablo Oyarzo, Johannes JD Singer, Kohitij Kar, Diego Vidaurre, and Radoslaw M Cichy. Adaptive
recruitment of cortex-wide recurrence for visual object recognition. bioRxiv, pp. 2025–10, 2025.
Brian E Russ, Kenji W Koyano, Julian Day-Cooney, Neda Perwez, and David A Leopold. Temporal
continuity shapes visual responses of macaque face patch neurons. Neuron, 111(6):903–914,
2023.
Shahd Safarani, Arne Nix, Konstantin Willeke, Santiago Cadena, Kelli Restivo, George Denfield,
Andreas Tolias, and Fabian Sinz. Towards robust vision by multi-task learning on monkey visual
cortex. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:739–751, 2021.
Christina Sartzetaki, Gemma Roig, Cees GM Snoek, and Iris IA Groen. One hundred neural net-
works and brains watching videos: Lessons from alignment. In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Ko-
hitij Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Franziska Geiger, et al. Brain-score: Which
artificial neural network for object recognition is most brain-like? bioRxiv, pp. 407007, 2018.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Noor Seijdel, Jessica Loke, Ron Van de Klundert, Matthew Van der Meer, Eva Quispel, Simon
Van Gaal, Edward HF De Haan, and H Steven Scholte. On the necessity of recurrent processing
during object recognition: it depends on the need for scene segmentation. Journal of Neuro-
science, 41(29):6281–6289, 2021.
Thomas Serre, Aude Oliva, and Tomaso Poggio. A feedforward architecture accounts for rapid
categorization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(15):6424–6429, 2007.
Ilia Sucholutsky, Lukas Muttenthaler, Adrian Weller, Andi Peng, Andreea Bobu, Been Kim,
Bradley C Love, Christopher J Cueva, Erin Grant, Iris IA Groen, Jascha Achterberg, Joshua B
Tenenbaum, Katherine M Collins, Katherine Hermann, Kerem Oktar, Klaus Greff, Martin N
Hebart, Nathan Cloos, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Nori Jacoby, Qiuyi Zhang, Raja Marjieh, Robert
Geirhos, Sherol Chen, Simon Kornblith, Sunayana Rane, Talia Konkle, Thomas O’Connell,
Thomas Unterthiner, Andrew K Lampinen, Klaus Robert Muller, Mariya Toneva, and Thomas L
Griffiths. Getting aligned on representational alignment. Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. Survey Certification, Expert Certification.
Yingtian Tang, Abdulkadir Gokce, Khaled Jedoui Al-Karkari, Daniel Yamins, and Martin Schrimpf.
Many-two-one: Diverse representations across visual pathways emerge from a single objective.
bioRxiv, pp. 2025–07, 2025.
Rufin VanRullen and Simon J Thorpe. The time course of visual processing: from early perception
to decision-making. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13(4):454–461, 2001.
Roel M Willems and Marius V Peelen. How context changes the neural basis of perception and
language. IScience, 24(5), 2021.
Siying Xie, Daniel Kaiser, and Radoslaw M Cichy. Visual imagery and perception share neural
representations in the alpha frequency band. Current Biology, 30(13):2621–2627, 2020.
Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10 mil-
lion image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 40(6):1452–1464, 2017.
Lianghui Zhu, Bencheng Liao, Qian Zhang, Xinlong Wang, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state space model. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Marius Zimmermann, Angelika Lingnau, Katharina Frey Doehler, Lisa Kaiser, Alice Stephan, and
Julian Wieland. The spatiotemporal neural dynamics of action-related features underlying action
recognition. OSF Preprints, 2025.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
A
EEG DATASET DETAILS
The EEG Moments Dataset was collected by the Neural Dynamics of Visual Cognition group, at
the Freie Universit¨at Berlin. The dataset will be made public in the near future.3 EEG data during
natural video viewing was collected for 6 participants, all with normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Procedures were approved by the ethical committee of the Department of Education and Psychology
at Freie Universit¨at Berlin and were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Stimuli were
the exact same as in Lahner et al. (2024): 1102 3-second second videos, sampled from Monfort et al.
(2019; 2021). Stimuli were square-cropped and resized to 268x268 pixels (5°×5° visual angle).
Stimuli were divided in non-overlapping sets, a “train set” of 1000 videos with 6 repeats and a “test
set” of 102 videos with 24 repeats. The dataset is accompanied with crowd-sourced metadata, to an-
notate each clip with five word-level scene, object, and action labels, sampled from Places365 (Zhou
et al., 2017), THINGS (Hebart et al., 2023), and Multi-Moments in Time (Monfort et al., 2021) re-
spectively. Additionally, provided were five sentence-level text descriptions, a spoken transcript, a
memorability score and a memorability decay rate.
The experiment consisted of a passive viewing paradigm with an orthogonal detection task to have
participants stay attentive, where participants had to report after X nr of random trials whether a
specific object/scene/action was present. The total experiment consisted of 8 sessions, that each
contained 3 repeats of the 250 train videos and 3 repeats of the 102 test videos. Each session
consisted of 16 runs of 66 trials, in between which participants could take breaks.
Every trial sequence consisted of 1s of a blank baseline screen, followed by 3s showing a video,
another 0.25s baseline and then 2s of blink time. In the case of prompted trials the second baseline
was followed by a 3s prompt screen, which was then again followed by the 2s blink time. Stimuli
were presented on a grey background with a red fixation cross present during the whole experiment.
EEG data was recorded using a 128-channel actiCAP set up with electrodees arranged according
to the standard 10-10 system (Nuwer et al., 1998) and a Brainvision actiCHamp amplifier. Data
was recorded at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz with online filtering (between 0.1 Hz and 100 Hz) and
rereferenced (to Fz). We performed offline preprocessing using Python and MNE (Gramfort et al.,
2013). The continuous EEG data was epoched into trials from -0.2s to 3.5s with respect to stimulus
onset and subsequently baseline corrected by subtracting the mean of the pre-stimulus interval for
each trial and channel separately. The data was then temporally down- sampled to 50 Hz. Next, we
performed multivariate noise normalisation (MVNN) based on the covariance matrices of each time-
point to reweigh (un)reliable sensors and to (de)emphasise specific spatial frequencies, as recom-
mended for multivariate pattern analysis methods like RSA (Guggenmos et al., 2018). We performed
analyses on two separate sets of electrodes: a posterior partition consisting of 35 electrodes and a
frontal partition consisting of 54 electrodes. The posterior partition contained the following elec-
trodes: ’Pz’, ’P3’, ’P7’, ’O1’, ’Oz’, ’O2’, ’P4’, ’P8’, ’P1’, ’P5’, ’PO7’, ’PO3’, ’POz’, ’PO4’, ’PO8’,
’P6’, ’P2’, ’P9’, ’PPO9h’, ’PO9’, ’O9’, ’OI1h’, ’PPO1h’. The frontal partition contained the fol-
lowing electrodes: ’Fp1’, ’F3’, ’F7’, ’FT9’, ’FC5’, ’FC1’, ’FT10’, ’FC6’, ’FC2’, ’F4’, ’F8’, ’Fp2’,
’AF7’, ’AF3’, ’AFz’, ’F1’, ’F5’, ’FT7’, ’FC3’, ’FCz’, ’FC4’, ’FT8’, ’F6’, ’F2’, ’AF4’, ’AF8’, ’F9’,
’AFF1h’, ’FFC1h’, ’FFC5h’, ’FTT7h’, ’FCC3h’, ’FCC4h’, ’FTT8h’, ’FFC6h’, ’FFC2h’, ’AFF2h’,
’F10’, ’AFp1’, ’AFF5h’, ’FFT9h’, ’FFT7h’, ’FFC3h’, ’FCC1h’, ’FCC5h’, ’FTT9h’, ’FTT10h’,
’FCC6h’, ’FCC2h’, ’FFC4h’, ’FFT8h’, ’FFT10h’, ’AFF6h’.
3For further inquiries or requests, contact Alessandro Gifford (alessandro.gifford@gmail.com)
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
MODEL DETAILS
Table 1: Model families. Action recognition models are trained on Kinetics 400 (Kay et al., 2017);
those also available on other datasets are marked by a,b.
Image Object Recognition
Action Recognition
CNNs
Transformers
SSMs
CNNs
Transformers
SSMs
1
AlexNet
2
CAiT
3
VideoMamba
6
CSN
2
MViTv2b
8
VideoMamba
Video
2
DenseNet
2
ConViT
5
I3D
2
TimeSformer
2
EfficientNet
2
DEiT
1
R2P1D
2
Uniformer
2
RegNet
2
MViTv2
2
SlowFast
2
Uniformerv2a
4
ResNet
3
Swin
4
Slowa
1
VideoMAE
2
ResNeXt
1
Twins
1
TPN
2
VideoMAEv2
4
VGG
2
ViT
5
TSMb
3
VideoSwina
2
WideResNet
2
X3D
1
Inception
Image
2
RepVGG
2
SeResNe(X)t
4
C2D
1
TimeSformer
2
Xception
4
TSNb
1
TSN
26
14
3
26+8
14+2
8
aAvailability also on Kinetics 710 (Carreira et al., 2019)
bAvailability also on Something-Something-v2 (Goyal et al., 2017)
Table 2: Exhaustive account of all models.
Image Object Recognition
Action Recognition
CNNs
Transformers
SSMs
CNNs
Transformers
SSMs
AlexNet
CAiT S
VideoMamba T
IR CSN R152
MViTv2 Sb
VideoMamba T IN1k f16
DenseNet161
CAiT XXS
VideoMamba S
IR CSN R152 BNfrozen IG65M
MViTv2 Bb
VideoMamba T IN1k f8
DenseNet201
ConViT S
VideoMamba M
IR CSN R50 BNfrozen IG65M
TimeSformer DivST
VideoMamba S IN1k f16
EfficientNetB3
ConViT B
IR CSN R152 IG65M
TimeSformer JointST
VideoMamba S IN1k f8
EfficientNetB6
DEiT S
IP CSN R152 IG65M
Uniformer S
VideoMamba M IN1k f16
RegNetX16gf
DEiT B
IP CSN R152
Uniformer B
VideoMamba M IN1k f8
RegNetY8gf
MViTv2 S
I3D R50
Uniformerv2 Ba
VideoMamba M mask f16
ResNet34
MViTv2 B
I3D R50 dotprod
Uniformerv2 B k710pre
VideoMamba M mask f8
ResNet50
Swin T
I3D R50 embgauss
VideoMAE B
ResNet101
Swin S
I3D R50 gauss
VideoMAEv2 S
ResNet152
Swin B
I3D R50 heavy
VideoMAEv2 S
ResNeXt50
Twins pcpvt B
R2P1D R50
VideoSwin T
ResNeXt101
ViT S
SlowFast R50
VideoSwin Sa
VGG11
ViT B
SlowFast R101
VideoSwin B
VGG11BN
Slow R50
VGG19
Slow R101
VGG19BN
Slow R50 IN1ka
WideResNet50
Slow R50 IN1k embgauss
WideResNet101
TPN R50
InceptionV4
TSM R50b
RepVGGa2
TSM R50 dotprod
RepVGGb2
TSM R50 embgauss
SeResNet50
TSM R50 gauss
SeResNeXt50
TSM MobOne s4
Xception41
X3D S
Xception71
X3D M
C2D R50 nopool
TimeSformer SpaceOnly
C2D R101 nopool
TSN Swin
C2D R50 pool8
C2D R50 pool16
TSN R50b
TSN R101
TSN D161
TSN MobOne s4
aAvailability also on Kinetics 710 (Carreira et al., 2019)
bAvailability also on Something-Something-v2 (Goyal et al., 2017)
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
SUPPLEMENTARY ANALYSES
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Decoding accuracy (-0.5)
Test  Posterior
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Test  Frontal
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Time (s)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Decoding accuracy (-0.5)
Train  Posterior
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
Time (s)
Train  Frontal
sub 1
sub 2
sub 3
sub 4
sub 5
sub 6
Figure 6: One versus one stimulus identity decoding per subject, corrected by chance level (-0.5).
Note: the decoding accuracy on the train set was computed using a randomly selected subset of
videos, matching the number in the test set (n=102).
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Stage I
Stage II
Posterior Electrodes
Frontal Electrodes
Model GFLOPs
Model GFLOPs
Model GFLOPs
Model GFLOPs
Model GFLOPs
Model GFLOPs
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Accuracy (%, in1k or k400)
Figure 7: (Top) Relationship of brain alignment with model accuracy (in ImageNet-1k for object
recognition models, and in Kinetics-400 for action recognition models). (Bottom) Relationship with
model computational complexity (in GFLOPs). Only stages during which models showed significant
brain alignment in Fig. 2 are shown.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Posterior Electrodes
Stage I
Stage II
Frontal Electrodes
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model sampling rate (fps)
Model context window (frames)
Model context window (frames)
Model context window (frames)
Model context window (frames)
Model context window (frames)
Model context window (frames)
Figure 8: (Top) Relationship of brain alignment with model sampling rate (fps). (Bottom) Rela-
tionship with model context window (frames). Only stages during which models showed significant
brain alignment in Fig. 2 are shown. Here, model sampling rate and context window positively
correlate with the brain alignment score of temporally integrating models (video-k400) significantly
(p<0.05) in posterior electrodes, stages III and IV.
sub 1
sub 2
sub 3
sub 4
sub 5
sub 6
Figure 9: Subject level brain alignment results for the test set for posterior and frontal electrode
partitions.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
pre-image
no-pre
pre-video
pre-video-ssl
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
Figure 10: Additional control for pretraining in the architecture comparison of Fig. 4.
Figure 11: Showing the layer plot of Fig. 4b for the full timecourse.
Figure 12: The comparison of Fig. 4 only now within object recognition models.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Transformers
CNNs
SSMs
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
Figure 13: Additional control for architecture in the pretraining comparison of Fig. 5.
Figure 14: No significant differences between fine-tuning datasets (Sth-Sth-v2 vs. K400).
Figure 15: No significant differences between fine-tuning datasets (K710 vs. K400).
Figure 16: Comparing VideoMamba versions; object (blue), object-pretrained action (orange), self-
supervised-pretrained action recognition (green), and pure self-supervised (red).
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 17: Same as Fig. 2 but without scaling to the upper noise ceiling. Gray shading shows both
lower and upper noise ceilings.
Figure 18: Non noise-scaled brain alignment of time-aggregated model features (RSA instead of
CT-RSA). Gray shading portrays the noise ceilings.
D
USE OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS (LLMS)
In the writing of this paper, LLMs were only minimally used to aid or polish writing, such as asking
for synonyms or rephrasing at the sentence or sub-sentence level.
22