--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SOFTMAX TRANSFORMERS ARE TURING-COMPLETE
Hongjian Jiang
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
hongjian.jiang@rptu.de
Michael Hahn
Saarland University
mhahn@lst.uni-saarland.de
Georg Zetzsche
MPI-SWS
Kaiserslautern, Germany
georg@mpi-sws.org
Anthony W. Lin
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau and MPI-SWS
Kaiserslautern, Germany
awlin@mpi-sws.org
ABSTRACT
Hard attention Chain-of-Thought (CoT) transformers are known to be Turing-
complete.
However, it is an open problem whether softmax attention Chain-
of-Thought (CoT) transformers are Turing-complete. In this paper, we prove a
stronger result that length-generalizable softmax CoT transformers are Turing-
complete. More precisely, our Turing-completeness proof goes via the CoT exten-
sion of the Counting RASP (C-RASP), which correspond to softmax CoT trans-
formers that admit length generalization. We prove Turing-completeness for CoT
C-RASP with causal masking over a unary alphabet (more generally, for letter-
bounded languages). While we show this is not Turing-complete for arbitrary
languages, we prove that its extension with relative positional encoding is Turing-
complete for arbitrary languages. We empirically validate our theory by training
transformers for languages requiring complex (non-linear) arithmetic reasoning.
1
INTRODUCTION
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have enabled powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) with
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) steps, which are capable of complex reasoning (cf. (Wei et al., 2022; Ope-
nAI et al., 2024)). But what task can (and cannot) be done by CoT transformers? This fundamental
question lies at the heart of the recent effort in understanding the ability of transformers through the
lens of formal language theory (see the survey by Strobl et al. (2024)). In particular, the question
whether CoT transformers is Turing-complete — that is, capable of solving any problems solvable
by Turing machines — is especially pertinent; see the work (cf. (P´erez et al., 2021; Bhattamishra
et al., 2020; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2024; Qiu et al., 2025; Li & Wang, 2025)).
Are CoT transformers Turing-complete?
All existing proofs of Turing-completeness of CoT
transformers (cf. (P´erez et al., 2021; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2024; Qiu
et al., 2025; Li & Wang, 2025)) employ hardmax attention, which is a rather unrealistic assumption.
In particular, its use comes at the cost of a lack of a trainability guarantee. It is still an open question
to date whether CoT transformers that use softmax attention are Turing-complete, and whether one
can guarantee some sort of trainability. A closer look at these proofs reveals a direct simulation
of Turing machines using CoT transformers, where the position of the head of the Turing machine
should be “deduced” by means of attention from the CoT tokens. This was so far achieved using
averaging hard attention, which uses ´|xx, yy| attention score (as in P´erez et al. (2021)) or layer
norm (as in Merrill & Sabharwal (2024)). It is unclear how to achieve this using softmax; more
generally, it is still an open question if softmax transformers can capture languages of averaging
hard-attention transformers (see Yang & Chiang (2024); Yang et al. (2024)).
Contributions.
The main contributions of this paper are (i) to prove for the first time that softmax
CoT transformers are Turing-complete, and (ii) to provide a guarantee of length generalizability.
More precisely, we use the framework from Huang et al. (2025) of length-generalizable softmax
transformers. Roughly speaking, a language L is length generalizable if an idealized learning pro-
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
cedure (in the sense of Huang et al. (2025)) converges to L, if provided with all inputs of length
ď i for some i. In particular, the authors showed that a simple declarative language called C-RASP
(with causal masking) Yang & Chiang (2024) can be converted into their framework, thereby also
admitting length generalization. To date, this is still one of the most predictive notions of trainability
for transformers that have solid theoretical foundations, as well as extensive empirical evidence. Our
results use the extensions of these models with CoT steps.
As we noted, a direct simulation of Turing machines using softmax transformers is rather tricky, as it
would be challenging to extract the position of the head of the Turing machine by means of softmax
attention. The main innovation in our proof technique is to exploit the counting power of softmax
transformers (through C-RASP) to simulate Minsky’s counter machines, instead of Turing machines.
This would entail Turing-completeness of softmax transformers. The details of our results are below.
We first show that CoT C-RASPs with causal masking are Turing-complete over a unary alphabet
Σ “ tau. More generally, we show that Turing-completeness holds for letter-bounded languages,
i.e., L Ď a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n, where a1, . . . , an are distinct letters in the alphabet. Such languages are espe-
cially interesting because of their ability to model complex number-theoretic concepts (e.g., prime
numbers, exponentiation, multiplication, etc.).
Interestingly, we show that CoT C-RASPs with causal masking are not Turing-complete over arbi-
trary languages. In fact, simple languages (e.g. palindromes) cannot be solved by CoT C-RASPs.
To address this limitation, the next novelty in our proof is to extend CoT C-RASPs with Relative
Positional Encodings (RPEs) (cf. Shaw et al. (2018); Liutkus et al. (2021); Dufter et al. (2022)),
which assigns a positional information to any token relative to another token. We extend the frame-
work of Huang et al. (2025) by adding RPEs, and show that length-generalizability still holds. Next,
we provide a simple RPE that enables CoT C-RASP to work with arbitrary input words: they allow
us to compute an unambiguous encoding of the input word into a number that can be accessed by
the simulated counter machine. This results in full Turing-completeness in the presence of RPEs
(surprisingly, in fact, a single RPE that works independently of the Turing machines).
We provide an experimental validation of our results for CoT C-RASP and CoT C-RASP[RPEs] by
showing length generalization of transformers for complex number-theoretic concepts with unary
representation (to be captured by CoT C-RASP) and with binary representation (to be captured
by CoT C-RASP[RPEs]). For example, the concept of prime numbers will be represented as the
language L “ tap : p is primeu with unary representation, and as L1 “ tbinppq : p is primeu with
binary representation (where binppq denotes the binary representation of p, e.g., 5 is written as 101).
Organization.
We start with the CoT models in Section 2. We then prove Turing-completeness
results for the unary and letter-bounded cases in Section 3. Turing-completeness for the general case
is proven in Section 4. We report our experiments in Section 5. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.
2
MODELS FOR TRAINABLE COT TRANSFORMERS
2.1
TRANSFORMERS AND C-RASP
Softmax Transformers.
We assume transformer decoders with softmax attention and causal
masking (Softmax Attention Transformers, SMAT). Our formal definition of softmax transformers
follows that of Huang et al. (2025). Attention weights are defined as
¯w “ softmaxplog n ¨ tvT
j KT Qviui
j“1q
(1)
where vi denotes activations at position i, and K, Q transform these to keys and queries, respec-
tively. Here, scaling with log n is included, as it is needed to theoretically represent sparse functions
across unboundedly input strings and circumvent theoretical limitations of soft attention (Chiang &
Cholak, 2022; Edelman et al., 2022). For the feedforward networks, we assume one-layer networks,
where each hidden unit has either ReLU or Heaviside activation. Here, as in Huang et al. (2025),
Heaviside is needed to theoretically represent functions with sharp thresholds; at any finite input
length, it can be arbitrarily closely approximated using ReLU MLPs. As is standard, we encode an
input x P Σ˚ by applying a token embedding function em : Σ Ñ Rk for some dimension k.
To define the computation of CoT via SMAT, we need the transformer to be able to output a token.
We further define an output function o : Rd Ñ Σ, parameterized by applying a linear function
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Rd Ñ R|Σ| followed by an argmax selecting the symbol receiving the highest score. Overall, we
view an SMAT as a length-preserving map T : Σ˚ Ñ Σ˚, where Tpxqi indicates the symbol
predicted after reading the prefix x1 . . . xi.
We refer to Appendix A for a formal definition and further discussion of design choices. We further
refer to Appendix A.4 for a brief primer on the framework and results of Huang et al. (2025).
C-RASPs.
C-RASP is equivalent to the fragment Ktr#s Yang & Chiang (2024); Yang et al. (2024)
of LTL[Count] Barcel´o et al. (2024) with only past operator:
φ
::“
Qa pa P Σq | φ ^ φ | ␣φ | φ _ φ | t „ t pt P tă, “, ąuq
t
::“
c pc P Nq | ÐÝ
#rφs | t ` t
Let us define the semantics of C-RASP by structural induction on the C-RASP expressions. Suppose
w “ w1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wn P Σ`. [As a side remark, it is possible to also allow the empty string ϵ as input, and
for this we can use the “start-of-string” symbol $. We do not do this to avoid clutter.] For syntactic
category φ, we will define rrφssw as a bitstring h1 ¨ ¨ ¨ hn P t0, 1un. On the other hand, for syntactic
category t, we will define rrtssw as a sequence m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mn P Zn of integers. For each sequence σ, we
will write σpiq to denote the ith element in the sequence. We start with the two base cases:
• φ “ Qa. In this case, hi P t0, 1u is 1 iff wi “ a.
• t “ c. In this case, mi “ c for each i.
We now proceed to the inductive cases:
• φ “ ψ1 ^ ψ2. Then, hi “ mintrrψ1sswpiq, rrψ2sswpiqu.
• φ “ ψ1 _ ψ2. Then, hi “ maxtrrψ1sswpiq, rrψ2sswpiqu.
• φ “ ␣ψ. Then, hi “ 1 ´ rrψsswpiq.
• φ “ t „ t1. Then, hi “ 1 iff rrtsswpiq „ rrt1sswpiq.
• t “ ÐÝ
#rφs. Let m0 “ 0. Then, for each i ą 0, mi “ mi´1 ` 1 if rrφsswpiq “ 1; else
mi “ mi´1.
Relative
Positional
Encodings.
We
also
define
an
extension
C-RASP[RPEs]
(resp.
SMAT[RPEs]) of C-RASP (resp.
SMAT) with Relative Positional Encodings (RPEs), which
are simply subsets R Ď N ˆ N. We start with C-RASP[RPEs]. In the sequel, the notation rrRss
refers to the function mapping each pi, jq P N ˆ N to t0, 1u such that rrRsspi, jq “ 1 iff pi, jq P R.
For the syntactic category t, we allow counting terms ÐÝ
#Rrφs which is to be interpreted at position j
as the cardinality of ti P r1, js : pi, jq P R, i |ù φu. Thus, we include i depending on the positional
encoding of each i relative to j. [Alternatively, R can be construed as allowing positions at certain
distances from each j.] This generalizes the class C-RASP[periodic, local] defined by Huang et al.
(2025), where R is either periodic or local.
As for SMAT[RPEs], the definition is a simple modification of SMAT: the formula in (1) becomes
¯w “ softmaxplog n ¨ tvT
j KT Qvi ` λrrRsspi, jqui
j“1q.
(2)
Here, we interpret λ as a bias term and rrRsspi, jq as 1 if pi, jq P rrRss; otherwise, it is 0.
Discussion of Relative Positional Encodings
Relative positional encodings, which modify atten-
tion scores with positional information, are a popular approach for providing positional information
to transformers. Our formalization of RPEs is a simple formal abstraction of additive relative po-
sitional encodings, which add a position-dependent term to the attention logits (Shaw et al., 2018;
Dai et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2021; Press et al., 2022; He et al., 2021). Schemes in the literature differ
in whether they are parameter-free (e.g., Press et al. (2022)) or involve learnable parameters. We
consider the especially simple case where R is determined a-priori, parameter-free, and independent
of the task at hand. We provide more discussion in Appendix A.3.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2.2
EXTENSIONS WITH CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT
Suppose Γ is the (finite) set of possible CoT tokens. CoT tokens in some ΓF Ď Γ are reserved to
indicate that the computation is to terminate and that the input string is to be “accepted”. Let Γ␣F “
ΓzΓF . We define a CoT to be a map F : Σ˚ Ñ Γ˚ Y Γω, where Γ is a finite set of CoT tokens,
where all non-final symbols are in Γ␣F Ď Γ. Here, note that we include both finite (terminating)
CoTs in Γ˚ and infinite (non-terminating) CoTs in Γω. Consideration of non-terminating CoTs is
needed for Turing completeness. The language LpFq recognized by F is the set of all w P Σ˚ where
Fpwq is finite and ends in an element of ΓF Ď Γ.
CoT C-RASPs.
We extend C-RASP (resp. C-RASP[RPEs]) with CoTs as follows. A CoT C-
RASP expression (over Γ) is a non-empty sequence S “ d1, . . . , dl of definitions di of the form:
Oai Ð φai,
where ai P Γ␣F and φai a normal C-RASP (resp. C-RASP[RPEs]) expression. The intuition of S is
a switch condition, which will tell the program which token to output. S outputs a token on an input
string w P pΣYSq` if rrφaisswp|w|q “ 1 for some i. The output of S on a string w P pΣYΓ␣F q` is
defined to be ai, where i is the smallest index such that rrφaisswp|w|q “ 1 and that rrφajsswp|w|q “ 0
for each j ă i. In this case, we write Spwq “ ai. Note that a CoT transformer might terminate
without outputting a token if rrφajsswp|w|q “ 0 for each j; in this case, the input string w will be
immediately rejected. Here, we write Spwq “ K (i.e. undefined).
A CoT C-RASP S generates the string U
“ U1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Um
P Γ˚ on the input w
P Σ˚ if
SpwU1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Uk´1q “ Uk for each k “ 1, . . . , m. Intuitively, this means that S autoregressively
outputs the symbols in U. The language LpTq accepted by a CoT C-RASP S is defined to be the set
of all w P Σ˚ such that there exists a finite string U P Γ˚ ending in an element of ΓF such that T
generates U on w, and non-last symbols in U are in Γ␣F .
We remark that, in many cases, the order of the sequence S is not so important, especially if we can
ensure that at most Oai is going to be satisfied. We will use this in the sequel.
CoT SMATs.
Recall that we view an SMAT T as a length-preserving map T : Σ˚ Ñ Σ˚, where
Tpxqi indicates the symbol predicted after reading the prefix x1 . . . xi. An SMAT T : pΣ Y Γq˚ Ñ
pΣYΓq˚ generates the string U “ U1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Um P Γ˚ on the input w if T autoregressively predicts the
string U – that is, if TpwU1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Uk´1q “ Uk for each k “ 1, . . . , m. The language LpTq accepted
by a CoT SMAT T is defined to be the set of all w P Σ˚ such that there exists a finite string U P Γ˚
ending in ΓF such that T generates U on w, and non-last symbols in U are in Γ␣F
Proposition 2.1. If a language is accepted by a CoT C-RASP (resp. C-RASP[RPEs]), then it is also
accepted by a CoT SMAT (resp. SMAT[RPEs]).
Proof Sketch for Proposition 2.1; see Appendix A.2 for full details. The starting point is Theorem 9
in Huang et al. (2025), which shows that C-RASP can be simulated by limit transformers, which
in turn are closely related to SMAT[RPEs]. This earlier result concerned language acceptance by a
single binary label computed at the final token; we extend it to CoT generation, obtaining a SMAT
that at each position outputs a one-hot vector indicating which CoT token to output.
2.3
LEARNABILITY WITH COT
We now show that CoT C-RASP is learnable in the framework of Huang et al. (2025). Intuitively,
this framework considers transformers being trained on data from some bounded length and then
deployed on data of larger lengths. We now make this formal. As before, we view SMATs as
defining length-preserving maps T : Σ˚ Ñ Σ˚. The hypothesis class Θ is the set of SMATs
T where each parameter vector and matrix of T is represented at p bits of precision, for some p
depending on T.
Definition 2.2. A language L is length-generalizably learnable with CoT if there is a CoT F with
LpFq “ L such that the following holds: For each i “ 1, 2, 3, . . . , use the idealized learning
procedure from Definition 6 in Huang et al. (2025) to choose a sequence of SMATs Ti P Θ (i “
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1, 2, 3, . . . ) such that each Ti generates Fpwq1...i´|w| on all inputs w, |w| ď i.1 Then, there is some
N0 depending on L such that for all i ą N0, Ti will exactly recognize the language L with CoT.
For the purpose of understanding the rest of the paper, the details of the idealized learning algo-
rithm from Definition 6 of Huang et al. (2025) is not of utmost importance, though suffice it to say
that it attempts to minimize a regularizer that results in favoring simpler and smaller transformers.
Interested readers can find more details in Appendix A.4.
Next, we analogously define the same notions in the presence of RPEs. Given a set R Ď N ˆ
N, define the hypothesis class ΘrRs as the set of SMAT[RPEs] T with the RPE R, where each
parameter vector and matrix of T is represented at p bits of precision, for some p depending on T,
and where each λ in (2) is fixed to 1. We then define length-generalizably learnable with CoT with
RPE R by replacing Θ with ΘR in Definition 2.2.
Here, the intuition is that we can learn a single SMAT that works for all input lengths, even when
training only on data from some bounded length, as long as the training length is sufficiently large.
We note that the definition of the learning setup is substantially simpler than in Huang et al. (2025)
since our transformers use no absolute positional encodings. Whereas Huang et al. (2025) used
separate hypothesis classes Θn at each context window size n, our learning setup requires a single
hypothesis class Θ that works for all input lengths. We then obtain the following guarantee:
Proposition 2.3. Consider a language expressible in C-RASP[RPEs] CoT, using RPE R. Then it is
length-generalizably learnable with RPE R.
Proof Sketch for Proposition 2.3; see Appendix A.2 for full proof. The proof is a straightforward
adaptation of results of Huang et al. (2025).
Theorems 7 and 9 in that paper show length-
generalizable learnability for languages expressible in C-RASP without CoT. Building on Propo-
sition 2.1, we extend this to CoT C-RASP.
3
UNARY CASE
In this section, we prove Turing-completeness of of CoT SMAT for unary alphabet, i.e., Σ “ tau.
More precisely, CoT SMAT recognizes all recursively enumerable languages over unary alphabet. In
fact, we prove stronger Turing-completeness results for letter-bounded languages and permutation-
invariant languages. In turn, these results will be proven by establishing CoT C-RASPs for such
languages and invoking Proposition 2.1. To help with readability, the reader may see Example 1,
where we construct a CoT C-RASP for the PARITY language, which is incidentally known (cf.
Huang et al. (2025)) not to be expressible by C-RASP without CoT.
Theorem 3.1. Each recursively enumerable language over a unary alphabet Σ “ tau can be rec-
ognized by SMAT in the CoT setting.
The theorem follows from the following proposition and Proposition 2.1.
Proposition 3.2. Each recursively enumerable language over a unary alphabet Σ “ tau can be
recognized by C-RASP in the CoT setting.
In turn, this follows directly from the following proposition; recall that a language L Ď Σ` is
letter-bounded if it is a subset of a˚
1a˚
2 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n for some distinct letters a1, . . . , an P Σ.
Proposition 3.3. Each recursively enumerable letter-bounded language over any alphabet Σ can
be recognized by C-RASP in the CoT setting.
We will deduce Proposition 3.3 from the following proposition, which will be most convenient for
our construction. Given an alphabet Σ with Σ “ ta1, . . . , anu, the corresponding Parikh map is the
map Ψ: Σ˚ Ñ Nn, where w P Σ˚ is mapped to p|w|a1, . . . , |w|anq, where |w|ai is the number of
occurrences of ai in w. In other words, Ψpwq is the vector that contains all letter counts in w. Notice
that for u, v P Σ˚, we have Ψpuq “ Ψpvq if and only if v can be obtained from u by re-arranging
the letters, or by permuting u. We say that a language L Ď Σ˚ is permutation-invariant if for any
u, v P Σ˚ with Ψpuq “ Ψpvq, we have u P L if and only if v P L. In other words, membership in L
does not depend on the order in which letters appear in a word.
1Such a sequence always exists, as there is just a finite number of inputs at each length i.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proposition 3.4. Each recursively enumerable permutation-invariant language over any alphabet
Σ can be recognized by C-RASP in the CoT setting.
We prove Proposition 3.4 by simulating counter machines. To define these, we define Φk to the set
of expressions φ of the following form: a conjunction of counter tests of the form xi „ 0, where
xi indicates the ith counter and „ P tą, “u. A k-counter machine (k-CM) is a tuple pP, ∆, q0, Fq,
where P is a set of states, ∆Ď P ˆ Φk ˆ P ˆ Zk is a finite set of transitions, q0 P P is the initial
state, and F Ď P is the set of final states. We also assume that the machine is deterministic, i.e., for
any transitions pp, φ, q, uq and pp, φ1, q1, u1q starting in the same state p, but with pq, uq ‰ pq1, u1q,
the expressions φ and φ1 cannot hold at the same time (i.e. φ ^ φ1 is unsatisfiable). For a transition
τ “ pp, φ, q, uq, we will use the notation srcpτq :“ p, tgtpτq :“ q, φτ :“ φ, and uτ :“ u.
A configuration of such a k-CM is a tuple pq, xq P P ˆ Zk, where q P P and x P Zk. For
configurations pp, xq, pq, yq P P ˆ Zk, we write pp, xq Ñ pq, yq if there is a transition τ P ∆with
srcpτq “ p, tgtpτq “ q, φτpxq is true, and y “ x ` uτ. By ˚ÝÑ, we denote the reflexive transitive
closure of the relation Ñ on the configurations. A configuration pq, xq is initial if q “ q0. We say
that an initial configuration pq0, xq is accepted if pq0, xq
˚ÝÑ pp, yq for some y P Zk and p P F. In
other words, if there exists a run of the k-CM that eventually arrives in a final state.
We will employ the following variant of the fact that counter machines are Turing-complete. Note
that if one uses CM as language acceptors, with input-reading transitions, then just two counters are
sufficient for Turing-completeness. In our construction, it will be most convenient to provide the
input of the CM at its counters. In this setting, it is known that three additional counters (aside from
the input counters) are sufficient for Turing-completeness:
Lemma 3.5. For every recursively enumerable set S Ď Nn, there is a pn ` 3q-CM so that for every
x P Nn, the configuration pq0, x, 0, 0, 0q is accepted if and only if x P S.
q0
start
q1
τ0 : x ą 0 { p´2, 0q
τ1 : x “ 0 { p0, 0q
Figure 1: 2-CM with transition labels τi.
This is a direct consequence of CM, as lan-
guage acceptors are able to recognize all re-
cursively enumerable languages (this is implicit
in (Minsky, 1961, Theorem Ia), and explicit
in (Fischer et al., 1968, Theorem 3.1)) and
that k-CM accept the same languages as 3-
CM (Greibach, 1976, Theorem 2.4). Moreover,
if S Ď Nn is recursively enumerable, then the
language L :“ tax1
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ axn
n
| px1, . . . , xnq P
Su is a recursively enumerable language, and
so there exists a three-counter machine M that recognizes L. This three-counter machine can easily
be turned into a pn ` 3q-CM as we need it: whenever M reads a letter ai, our CM will decrement
the i-th counter; and when M uses counter j P t1, 2, 3u, then our CM will use counter n ` j.
Corollary 3.6. For every recursively enumerable permutation-invariant language L Ď Σ`, there is
a pn`3q-CM so that for every w P Σ`, we have w P L if and only if pq0, Ψpwq, 0, 0, 0q is accepted.
Proof. Follows from Lemma 3.5: For a recursively enumerable L Ď Σ`, the Parikh image ΨpLq is
recursively enumerable; since L is permutation-invariant, we have w P L iff Ψpwq P ΨpLq.
Proof of Proposition 3.4. Let Σ “ ta1, . . . , anu and take a permutation-invariant recursively enu-
merable language L Ď Σ˚. From Corollary 3.6, we get a pn ` 3q-CM such that from the configura-
tion C0 :“ pq0, x1, . . . , xn, 0, 0, 0q, the CM will reach F if and only if ax1
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ axn
n P L.
We define the set Γ of CoT tokens to be Σ unioned with the transition relation ∆. Note that the
C-RASP is going to be evaluated at the last position on input wv where v P Γ˚. The construction of
the C-RASP CoT transformer considers the following cases.
Initial step.
At the beginning, the last symbol in the input to the C-RASP is in Σ. This indicates
that the CM is in the initial state q0. We add the following rules to our CoT C-RASP expression S
Oτ Ð φpÐÝ
#rQa1s, . . . , ÐÝ
#rQansq ^ Qa,
for each a P Σ and each transition τ “ pq0, φ, q1, uq P ∆. The order in which the rules are added is
not important since the counter machine is deterministic.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Non-initial step.
After an initial step, the last symbol in the input is always a transition of the
CM, which indicates which state the CM is in. We add the following rules to our CoT C-RASP
expression S (in no particular order):
Oτ 1 Ð φτ 1pt1, . . . , tn`3q ^ Qτ,
for any τ, τ 1 P ∆with tgtpτq “ srcpτ 1q. Here, t1, . . . , tn`3 are the count-valued C-RASP terms
ti “ ÐÝ
#rQais `
ÿ
ρP∆
uρpiq ¨ ÐÝ
#rQρs
for i “ 1, . . . , n
(3)
ti “
ÿ
ρP∆
uρpiq ¨ ÐÝ
#rQρs
for i “ n ` 1, n ` 2, n ` 3.
(4)
Intuitively, each rrtissw will tell us the value of the ith counter. For i “ 1, . . . , n, we have the addi-
tional summand ÐÝ
#rQais because this is the initial value of the ith counter, according to Lemma 3.5.
Output symbols.
The desired output symbols for acceptance are any τ P ∆for which tgtpτq P F.
Correctness.
The C-RASP directly simulates the CM, so correctness is immediate.
Finally, Proposition 3.3 follows easily from Proposition 3.4: We can modify our C-RASP to check
(e.g. in each step) that the (initial) input word belongs to a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n. See Appendix B for the proof.
Example 1. In this example, we illustrate the construction of CoT C-RASP for parity (i.e. tw P
ta, bu` : |w|a ”2 0u), which is a permutation invariant language. Note that this was proven not
to be expressible in C-RASP without CoT Huang et al. (2025). We start with the the two 2-counter
machine as depicted in Figure 1. To make the illustration simpler, we have opted to use only 2
counters (which are sufficient for this language), instead of 5 counters. The counter machine starts
at pq0, x, yq, where x records the number of a’s and y the number of b’s. It reduces x by 2 until x
becomes zero, at which point it accepts by moving to q1.
We now specify the C-RASP rules for the counter machine. We use c as an arbitrary letter in ta, bu.
We start with initial step, corresponding to the first transition taken by the counter machine:
Oτ0 Ð ÐÝ
#rQas ą 0 ^ Qc
Oτ1 Ð ÐÝ
#rQas “ 0 ^ Qc
(5)
Note that, for our language, acceptance is only possible when the input is nonempty, i.e., the last
symbol at the initial step is some c P ta, bu. The C-RASP for the non-initial steps are as follows:
Oτ0 Ð ÐÝ
#rQas ´ 2 ¨ ÐÝ
#rQτ0s ą 0 ^ Qτ0
Oτ1 Ð ÐÝ
#rQas ´ 2 ¨ ÐÝ
#rQτ0s “ 0 ^ Qτ0
(6)
4
GENERAL CASE
Given that Propositions 3.3 and 3.4 show that for letter-bounded or permutation-invariant languages,
CoT C-RASP are Turing-complete, this raises the question of whether they are even Turing-complete
for a general language L Ď Σ˚. The following shows that they are not:
Proposition 4.1. C-RASP in the CoT setting is not Turing-complete over Σ “ ta, bu.
This follows from the following lemma (e.g. take PALINDROME).
Lemma 4.2. If a language L is recognized by CoT C-RASP, then for each n the restriction Ln Ď L
to all inputs of length ď n is recognized by an automaton of size polynomial in n.
This is an immediate corollary of the logarithmic communication complexity of Limit Transformers
and hence C-RASP (Theorem 12 in Huang et al. (2025)), which also holds even equipped with
learned Absolute Positional Encodings (APEs). See Appendix C for details. However, we will show
that there is one simple relative positional encoding that makes CoT C-RASP fully Turing-complete:
Theorem 4.3. Every recursively enumerable language over an arbitrary alphabet Σ can be recog-
nized by C-RASP[RPEs] in the CoT setting and, thus, can be recognized by CoT SMAT[RPEs].
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Membership in CoT SMAT[RPEs] follows from Proposition 2.1.
The CoT C-RASP[RPEs] constructed in Theorem 4.3 is based on the following idea. Given an input
w P Σ˚ with say |Σ| “ n, our CoT C-RASP[RPEs] first computes an encoding of w P Σ˚ as a
vector in Nn. After this, it uses a construction similar to above to simulate a CM on this encoding.
To avoid confusion between multiplication of 0 and 1 on the one hand and concatenation of words,
we will use different symbols for the numbers 0, 1 P N and the letters 0 and 1. Then for a “ 0,
b “ 1, c “ 0, and d “ 1, we can distinguish between ab “ 0 and cd “ 01. To convert between
these objects, we use the notation 0 :“ 0, 0 “ 0, 1 “ 1, and 1 “ 1.
Encoding words over two letters
We first describe how to encode two-letter words. Formally,
we have a partial function β : N Û t0, 1u˚, where Û means that β is partial, i.e. not every number
represents a word. However, if a number does represent a word, then that word is unique. A number
x P N will represent a word if and only if x ‰ 0. Hence, suppose x ‰ 0. Then we can write
x “ řm
i“0 bi2i, where bm, . . . , b0 P t0, 1u, and bm “ 1. Let j “ maxpti P r0, ms | bi “ 0u Y t0uq
be the left-most position of a zero when writing the most significant digit first (and j “ 0 if zero
does not appear). Then we set
βpxq :“ bj´1 bj´2 ¨ ¨ ¨ b0.
In other words, βpxq is the word consisting of all digits of x’s binary representation, when reading
from most significant digit first, and starting after the left-most zero digit (and βpxq “ ε if there is
no zero digit). For example, we have
βp25 ` 23 ` 21q “ 1010,
βp26q “ 00000,
βp24 ` 23 ` 21q “ 10.
Encoding words over arbitrary alphabets
Now suppose Σ is an arbitrary alphabet with Σ “
ta1, . . . , anu. Then we encode words in Σ˚ by vectors in Nn. Similar to above, we define a partial
function σ: Nn Û Σ˚. Let us first describe the domain of σ. We say that an n-tuple pw1, . . . , wnq
of words w1, . . . , wn P t0, 1u˚ is consistent if (i) the words w1, . . . , wn have the same length, say
m P N and (ii) for every position i P r1, ms, there is exactly one j P r1, ns such that wj has the
letter 1 at position i. Intuitively, the consistent n-tuples correspond exactly to the words in Σ˚: A
word w P Σ˚ of length m corresponds to the n-tuple pw1, . . . , wnq where each wi has length n,
and the 1’s in wi are exactly at those positions that carry ai in w. This leads to an intermediate
partial function µ: pt0, 1u˚qn Û Σ˚, where µpw1, . . . , wnq is defined if and only if pw1, . . . , wnq
is consistent, and in that case, µpw1, . . . , wnq P Σ˚ is the word corresponding to w1, . . . , wn.
With this, we are ready to define σ. The domain of σ consists of those x “ px1, . . . , xnq P Nn
where (i) all entries are non-zero and (ii) the tuple pβpx1q, . . . , βpxnqq is consistent. Moreover, for
x “ px1, . . . , xnq P dom σ, we set
σpxq :“ µpβpx1q, . . . , βpxnqq.
For example, for n “ 2, we have
σp24 ` 20, 24 ` 22 ` 21q “ µpβp24 ` 20q, βp24 ` 22 ` 21qq “ µp001, 110q “ a2a2a1.
An important property of σ is that if we change x “ px1, . . . , xnq by introducing further 1’s on the
left of the binary representation of some xi, then σpxq remains the same. For example, we also have
σp25 ` 24 ` 20, 24 ` 22 ` 21q “ µpβp25 ` 24 ` 20q, βp24 ` 22 ` 21qq “ µp001, 110q “ a2a2a1.
although we modified the left-most entry by introducing the term 25. Thus, for every w P Σ˚ and
every k P N, there is an x P Nn such that (i) all entries in x are ě k and (ii) σpxq “ w.
The relative positional encoding
A key ingredient in our proof is the relative positional encoding
(recall that we have shown that without RPE, Theorem 4.3 does not hold). Perhaps surprisingly, the
RPE we use in the proof does not depend on the language we are accepting: the RPE is the same
relation for every Turing machine we want to simulate. Its definition is based on the partial function
β : N Û t0, 1u˚ above. We define the relation R Ď N ˆ N as
pi, jq P R
ðñ
i ď j, i P r1, |βpjq|s, and the word βpjq P t0, 1u˚ has 1 at position i
for every pi, jq P N ˆ N. For example, if j “ 26 ` 25 ` 23 ` 21 ` 20, then we have βpjq “ 1011
and hence p1, jq, p3, jq, p4, jq P R, but p2, jq R R.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Overview
Our C-RASP with CoT will work in two phases. During the first phase, it prolongs the
input so that subsequently, a σ-encoding of the original input word can be computed using Count-
Valued Operations. For this, it relies on the RPE R. In the second phase, our C-RASP simulates a
counter machine, similar to the permutation-invariant case.
Phase I: Constructing encoding of the input word
In order to compute the σ-encoding x P
Nn of the input word w P Σ˚, our CoT C-RASP proceeds as follows. It compute the entries
xp1q, . . . , xpnq of x in this order. Suppose pw1, . . . , wnq is the consistent tuple representing w, i.e.
µpw1, . . . , wnq “ w. To compute xp1q, our CoT C-RASP appends a dummy letter l1 until the
current word length ℓsatisfies βpℓq “ w1. Note that this is possible since there are infinitely many
ℓwith βpℓq “ w1. Once this holds, we place a special letter ‘1. Then, the CoT C-RASP appends a
dummy letter l2 until the current word length satisfies βpℓq “ w2, and then places ‘2, etc.
Initially, the last letter will be some ai P Σ. Then, our CoT C-RASP simply outputs l1: We have
Ol1 Ð Qai
(7)
for each ai P Σ. When we have a letter li at the end, our CoT C-RASP checks whether the current
length ℓalready satisfies βpℓq “ wi:
O‘i Ð Qli ^ ÐÝ
#RrQais “ ÐÝ
#rQais ^ ÐÝ
#RrJs “ ÐÝ
#rQais
(8)
Oli Ð Qli ^ pÐÝ
#RrQais ‰ ÐÝ
#rQais _ ÐÝ
#RrJs ‰ ÐÝ
#rQaisq
(9)
for each i “ 1, . . . , n. If we evaluate rule 8 on a word of length ℓ, we check that (i) the last letter is
li, (ii) the number of positions j with pj, ℓq P R that carry ai equals the total number of positions
that carry ai, and (iii) the number of positions j with pj, ℓq P R equals the number of positions that
carry ai. Thus, conditions (ii) and (iii) say that the positions j with pj, ℓq P R are precisely those
that carry an ai. In other words, βpℓq “ wi. If these conditions are met, then the output letter is ‘i.
Moreover, if we evaluate rule 9, we check that βpℓq does not equal wi yet. In this case, the output
letter is again li, and the whole check will be repeated with the next word length.
If the last letter is ‘i with i ď n ´ 1, then we start computing xpi ` 1q: We output li`1 in 10:
Oli`1 Ð Q‘i
for each i “ 1, . . . , n ´ 1
(10)
Oτ Ð Q‘n
for each transition τ P ∆with srcpτq “ q0
(11)
If the last letter is ‘n, we initiate the CM run by outputting some initial transition τ. This is rule 11.
After the above process, we have placed ‘1, . . . , ‘n. Thus, the current input word is then of the form
w1 “ wlf1
1 ‘1lf2
2 ‘2¨ ¨ ¨ lfn
n ‘n, where for the tuple x “ px1, . . . , xnq with xi “ |w|`f1`¨ ¨ ¨`fi,
we have σpxq “ w. A count-valued operation can then access the encoding of w using the terms
Xi “ ÐÝ
#rÐÝ
#r‘is “ 0s
for i “ 1, . . . , n
(12)
Thus, Xi is the number of positions that have no occurrence of ‘i to their left (and do not carry ‘i
themselves). Since there is exactly one occurrence of ‘i, this means Xi is exactly the position of
‘i, minus one. Therefore, the term Xi evaluates to xpiq, meaning we have σpX1, . . . , Xnq “ w.
Phase II: Simulating the counter machine
During the first phase, our CoT C-RASP appended
letters to make an encoding x P Nn of the input word available through C-RASP terms Eq. (12).
We now use a CM that starts with this encoding in its counters and then decides whether w P L.
Such a counter machine exists because of Lemma 3.5 and the fact that S “ tx P Nn | σpxq P Lu is
recursively enumerable (since σ is computable). The simulation of the CM on x works exactly like
in Section 3, except that in the terms defined in equation 3, instead of using ÐÝ
#rQais for i “ 1, . . . , n,
we use the C-RASP term Xi defined in equation 12. See Appendix C for details.
Example 2. Let us illustrate the case of the language L “ ta, bu˚b of words that end in b. We will
need a CM that recognizes the set S “ tx P N2 | σpxq P Lu of encodings of words in L. Observe
that x P N2 satisfies σpxq P L if and only if xp1q is even: This is because for x P N where βpxq
is non-empty, the string βpxq P t0, 1u˚ ends in 0 if and only if x is even. Therefore, our CM in
Fig. 1 recognizes exactly S. Thus, our CoT C-RASP will have the following rules. For Phase I, it
has the rules (7) to (12), where a1 “ a and a2 “ b. For Phase II, we want to simulate the CM from
Example 1, and so we introduce the same rules as (5) and (6), except that in (6), Qa is replaced with
X1 everywhere. This way, we simulate the CM in Fig. 1 on some encoding x P N2 of the input w
(i.e. σpxq “ w) and then check whether xp1q is even.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5
EMPIRICAL EXPERIMENTS
We empirically validate our Turing-completeness results on several complex arithmetic concepts.
See Table 2 in Appendix D for details. Our theory predicts that CoT C-RASP with NoPE suffices for
unary representation (of numbers), while RPEs are needed for binary representation. Accordingly,
we conduct three experiments: 1) Unary without positional encodings, 2) Binary with RPEs, and 3)
Binary without RPEs. For each task, we construct two counter machines (CMs), one for the Unary
representation and one for the Binary representation.
We employ a decoder-only LLaMA architecture Touvron et al. (2023) 2 and train all weights from
scratch without any pre-trained initialization. The model is trained on inputs of length [1-100] and
evaluated on three test sets: an in-distribution split with lengths [1-100] (test0), and two out-of-
distribution splits with lengths [101-200] (test1) and [201-300] (test2). The SMATs are trained
using AdamW (weight decay 0.01) with a batch size of 64 and maximum 30k steps. To prevent
overfitting, we use an EarlyStopping callback that monitors validation loss and stops training if the
model’s accuracy reaches 100% on the in-distribution test set (test0) for three consecutive epochs.
As shown in Table 1, SMAT achieves strong in-distribution performance on Unary representations,
with accuracy exceeding 99.90%. It also generalizes well to longer sequences, maintaining high ac-
curacy. In contrast, the Binary representation with RPEs exhibits near-perfect generalization across
all three test splits, consistently achieving 100% accuracy. However, removing RPEs causes gener-
alization to break down: only Prime reaches around 95% on test0, and all tasks exhibit almost no
generalization. Together, these results show a clear contrast: Unary inputs generalize naturally with
NoPE, whereas Binary inputs require RPEs to achieve any meaningful length generalization.
Language
Unary
Binary (w/ RPE)
Binary (w/o RPE)
test0
test1
test2
test0
test1
test2
test0
test1
test2
Prime
100
100
100
100
100
100
95.00
0.40
0.00
Exponential
99.95
99.96
99.96
100
100
100
82.80
0.06
0.00
Division
99.90
100
99.99
100
100
100
76.40
0.02
0.00
Greatest Common Divisor
99.99
100
99.70
100
100
100
70.20
0.03
0.00
Multiplication
99.99
100
99.98
100
100
100
64.40
0.02
0.00
Table 1: Generalization accuracy on three test sets (test0, test1, test2) in unary/binary.
6
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Related work.
Our work builds on Huang et al. (2025): They defined a learnable framework
of softmax attention transformers (called Limit Transformers), and a declarative framework (C-
RASP) for them. Most of our main results use new techniques that have not been used in relation to
transformers, e.g., simulation of counter machines. In relation to the learnability framework, Huang
et al. (2025) dealt with transformers without CoT or Relative Positional Encodings, not sufficient
for Turing-completeness. We extended their proof techniques to these extensions. Yang et al. (2026)
showed that the learnability framework from Huang et al. (2025) is learnable in the limit, but not in
a computable sense of Chen et al. (2025). S¨alzer et al. (2026) proved that softmax Transformers are
“almost” Turing-complete: their projections yield all recursively enumerable languages.
Similar to our work, Hou et al. (2025) aims to provide length-generalizing constructions for Turing
completeness. However, there are two key differences. First, we demonstrate the existence of soft-
max transformer constructions, whereas Hou et al. (2025) only demonstrated constructions in RASP
(Weiss et al., 2021). Second, the approach of Hou et al. (2025) ensures length generalization only
if no n-grams are repeated, for some fixed n, which is likely to be unrealistic in the limit of long
inputs. In contrast, our approach theoretically ensures full length generalizability.
Future work.
Recent results have refined Turing-completeness for transformers (albeit with hard
attention) by relating the number of CoT steps and complexity classes, e.g., see (Merrill & Sabhar-
wal, 2024) and (Li & Wang, 2025). Refining our result with complexity is left for future work.
2https://huggingface.co/meta-llama
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pablo Barcelo, Michael Benedikt, David Chiang, Andy Yang, Will Merrill, and Jon
Rawski for helpful discussions. This material is based in part upon work supported by the Eu-
ropean Union3
(ERC, LASD, 101089343, https://doi.org/10.3030/101089343
and and ERC, FINABIS, 101077902, https://doi.org/10.3030/101077902).
REFERENCES
Pablo Barcel´o, Alexander Kozachinskiy, Anthony Widjaja Lin, and Vladimir V. Podolskii. Logical
languages accepted by transformer encoders with hard attention. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenRe-
view.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gbrHZq07mq.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, and Navin Goyal. On the computational power of transformers
and its implications in sequence modeling. In CoNLL, pp. 455–475. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2020.
Thomas Chen, Tengyu Ma, and Zhiyuan Li. Non-asymptotic length generalization. In Forty-second
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
David Chiang and Peter Cholak. Overcoming a theoretical limitation of self-attention. In Smaranda
Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022,
Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pp. 7654–7664. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2022. doi: 10.18653/V1/2022.ACL-LONG.527. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
2022.acl-long.527.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2978–2988, 2019.
Philipp Dufter, Martin Schmitt, and Hinrich Sch¨utze. Position information in transformers: An
overview. Computational Linguistics, 48(3):733–763, 09 2022. ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/
coli a 00445. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_a_00445.
Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, and Cyril Zhang. Inductive biases and variable
creation in self-attention mechanisms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
5793–5831. PMLR, 2022.
Patrick C Fischer, Albert R Meyer, and Arnold L Rosenberg. Counter machines and counter lan-
guages. Mathematical systems theory, 2(3):265–283, 1968. doi: 10.1007/BF01694011.
Sheila A. Greibach. Remarks on the complexity of nondeterministic counter languages. Theor.
Comput. Sci., 1(4):269–288, 1976. doi: 10.1016/0304-3975(76)90072-4.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
with disentangled attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kaiying Hou, Eran Malach, Samy Jelassi, David Brandfonbrener, and Sham M. Kakade. Universal
length generalization with turing programs. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=RNSd6G3lcD.
3Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those
of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor
the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Xinting Huang, Andy Yang, Satwik Bhattamishra, Yash Raj Sarrof, Andreas Krebs, Hattie Zhou,
Preetum Nakkiran, and Michael Hahn.
A formal framework for understanding length gen-
eralization in transformers.
In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=U49N5V51rU.
Zachary Izzo, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D Lee. Quantitative bounds for length generalization in
transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27015, 2025.
Qian Li and Yuyi Wang. Constant bit-size transformers are turing complete. CoRR, abs/2506.12027,
2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2506.12027. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2506.12027.
Antoine Liutkus, Ondrej C´ıfka, Shih-Lun Wu, Umut Simsekli, Yi-Hsuan Yang, and Ga¨el Richard.
Relative positional encoding for transformers with linear complexity. In Marina Meila and Tong
Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pp. 7067–7079. PMLR, 2021. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
liutkus21a.html.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Aus-
tria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=NjNGlPh8Wh.
Marvin L Minsky. Recursive unsolvability of post’s problem of” tag” and other topics in theory of
turing machines. Annals of Mathematics, 74(3):437–455, 1961. doi: 10.2307/1970290.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
Sim´on Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David M´ely, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cer´on Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Jorge P´erez, Pablo Barcel´o, and Javier Marinkovic. Attention is turing-complete. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 22:75:1–75:35, 2021. URL https://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-302.html.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ruizhong Qiu, Zhe Xu, Wenxuan Bao, and Hanghang Tong. Ask, and it shall be given: On the
turing completeness of prompting. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AS8SPTyBgw.
Marco S¨alzer, Chris K¨ocher, Alexander Kozachinskiy, Georg Zetzsche, and Anthony Widjaja Lin.
The counting power of transformers. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=IAFwK6NyrP.
Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani. Self-attention with relative position represen-
tations. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp. 464–468, New Orleans, Louisiana,
June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-2074.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/N18-2074/.
Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. What formal languages
can transformers express? A survey. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 12:543–561, 2024. doi:
10.1162/TACLz Az 00663. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00663.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ee
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
models. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021.
Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
Barua, and Colin Raffel.
mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 483–498, 2021.
Andy Yang and David Chiang. Counting like transformers: Compiling temporal counting logic into
softmax transformers. CoRR, abs/2404.04393, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2404.04393. URL
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.04393.
Andy Yang, Lena Strobl, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. Simulating hard attention using soft
attention. CoRR, abs/2412.09925, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2412.09925. URL https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.09925.
Andy Yang, Pascal Bergstr¨aßer, Georg Zetzsche, David Chiang, and Anthony Lin. Length general-
ization bounds for transformers, 2026. Under submission (preprint: https://zenodo.org/
records/18800700).
A
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL ON SECTION 2
A.1
FORMAL DEFINITION OF SOFTMAX TRANSFORMERS.
Our definition of softmax transformers follows that of Huang et al. (2025), though we use a highly
simplified notation here for exposition. In a SoftMax Averaging Transformers (SMAT), given a
sequence
v1, . . . , vn
a single layer outputs
w1, . . . , wn
where
wi :“ vi ` Cpv1
iq
where Cp¨q is a feedforward network, v1
i :“ ři
j“1 ¯wpjqvj and
¯w “ softmaxplog n ¨ tvT
j KT Qviui
j“1q
(13)
where vi denotes activations at position i, and K, Q transform these to keys and queries, respec-
tively. Here, scaling with log n is included, as it is needed to theoretically represent sparse functions
across unboundedly input strings and circumvent theoretical limitations of soft attention (Chiang &
Cholak, 2022; Edelman et al., 2022). Here, we show the case of a single head, extension to multiple
heads is straightforward.
We assume C is a one-layer feedforward layer, where each hidden unit has either ReLU or Heaviside
activation. Here, as in Huang et al. (2025), Heaviside is needed to theoretically represent functions
with sharp thresholds; at any finite input length, it can be arbitrarily closely approximated using
ReLU MLPs.
Huang et al. (2025) also assume that attention logits are rounded to fixed precision; we do not
require this for our results here. Also, whereas Huang et al. (2025) consider Absolute Positional
Encodings (APE), which necessitated introducing fixed context windows and positional offsets, we
do not consider APE here, and so do not need to introduce offsets. Thus, SMATs considered in the
present paper are uniformly applicable to arbitrarily long inputs.
To interface SMAT with an input string w P Σ`, we apply a token embedding function em : Σ Ñ Rk
for some dimension k; these are followed by some number of SMAT layers. To define a CoT SMAT,
we need the transformer to be able to output a token. To this end, we define an output function
o : Rd Ñ Σ, parameterized by applying a linear function Rd Ñ R|Σ| followed by an argmax
selecting the symbol receiving the highest score.
Overall, we view an SMAT as a length-preserving map T : Σ˚ Ñ Σ˚, where Tpxqi indicates the
symbol predicted after reading the prefix x1 . . . xi.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Discussion
Our formalization of SMAT follows the setting of Huang et al. (2025), which was
designed to study the learnability of transformers. We note two aspects, which are needed to enable
softmax transformers to represent functions across arbitrarily long inputs, and overcome well-known
theoretical limitations of softmax attention (Hahn, 2020; Chiang & Cholak, 2022). First, scaling
attention logits with log n is necessary to represent sparse attention to specific positions, which
otherwise would be impossible to achieve using softmax attention (Hahn, 2020; Chiang & Cholak,
2022; Edelman et al., 2022). Importantly, this scaling does not involve any new learnable parameters.
Second, using Heaviside activations is necessary to represent functions with sharp thresholds, as is
needed to perform exact comparison of counts across unboundedly long lengths. At any finite input
length, Heaviside can be arbitrarily closely approximated using ReLU MLPs. We view Heaviside
(which is not differentiable) as a theoretical proxy for steep ReLU network as is standardly trainable.
A.2
PROOFS FOR COT EXPRESSIVENESS AND LEARNABILITY
Proof of Proposition 2.1. This is a simple extension of Theorem 9 in Huang et al. (2025), as we now
explain.
We define a CoT as a map Σ˚ Ñ Σ˚ from an input string w P Σ˚ to the sequence w2 . . . , wN
generated by a CoT C-RASP or CoT SMAT on the input string w. Starting from a CoT generated
by a CoT C-RASP program, we aim to translate it to a CoT generated by a CoT SMAT.
We first explain the case without RPEs. We need to show that, if a CoT is generated in C-RASP
CoT, then there is an SMAT generating the same CoT. In the case of language acceptance by a single
binary label computed at the final token, Theorem 9 in Huang et al. (2025) shows that C-RASP can
be simulated by a limit transformer without positional information. Our first observation is that, in
the model of Huang et al. (2025), a limit transformer without positional information is equivalent
to a standard transformer without positional encodings and infinite context window, which in turn
is equivalent to an SMAT as defined in our paper here. The proof of Theorem 9 in Huang et al.
(2025) builds a transformer that computes the values of all boolean predicates computed in the C-
RASP program at each position in the string, with one dimension in the model’s activations fo each
boolean predicate. This means that the truth values of the expressions φai appearing in the switch
condition S can also be computed. In order to evaluate the switch condition, we add another layer
(whose attention heads have zero value matrices, i.e., don’t contribute), then linearly project the
relevant entries onto a binary vector of length |Γ|, and apply a piecewise linear function to convert
this into a one-hot vector selecting the lowest-index token ai such that φai is true. We now have
a limit transformer which at each position outputs a one-hot vector indicating which CoT token to
output. This means, whenever a CoT is expressible in C-RASP CoT, it is also expressible by SMAT
with CoT.
We now consider the case with RPEs. We again build on Theorem 9 in Huang et al. (2025). We first
note that the definition of attention logits with RPE exactly matches the definition of attention logits
in Limit Transformers with functions ϕ in Huang et al. (2025), where ϕpi, jq is simply rrRsspi, jq.
Hence, for the purpose of expressivity, any SMAT[RPEs] transformer is equivalent to a limit trans-
former. Then, when translating from C-RASP to SMAT, implementing an RPE into an attention head
proceeds along exactly the same lines as the translation of the special case #rj ď i : ψpi, jqsPpjq
in the proof of that theorem.
Proof of 2.3. We first consider the case without RPEs. We build on Theorem 7 in Huang et al.
(2025) and its variant for transformers without positional encodings, Corollary 18 in Huang et al.
(2025). First, from Proposition 2.1, we know that if a language is expressible in C-RASP CoT, then
it is also expressible by SMAT with CoT. The proof of that proposition further notes that our model
of SMAT is equivalent to a limit transformer without positional information. Then, by Corollary 18
in Huang et al. (2025), any input-output map expressible by a limit transformer without positional
information is length-generalizably learnable. This proves the result for the case without RPEs.
We now consider the case with RPEs. The proof is similar to the previous case; however, we need
to (i) show that C-RASP[RPEs] can be simulated by SMATs with RPE, (ii) length generalization
for SMAT RPE transformers follows from expressibility by SMATs with RPE. First, regarding (i),
we again build on Theorem 9 in Huang et al. (2025), extending our argument from the proof of
Proposition 2.1. We first note that the definition of attention logits with RPE exactly matches the
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
definition of attention logits in Limit Transformers with functions ϕ in Huang et al. (2025), where
ϕpi, jq is simply rrRsspi, jq. Hence, for the purpose of expressivity, any SMAT[RPEs] transformer
is equivalent to a limit transformer. Then, when translating from C-RASP to SMAT, implementing
an RPE into an attention head proceeds along exactly the same lines as the translation of the special
case #rj ď i : ψpi, jqsPpjq in the proof of that theorem. Second, regarding (ii), we use Corollary
18 in Huang et al. (2025) and note that the addition of fixed (not learned) RPE to attention heads in
both the learned transformers and limit transformers has no impact on the argument.
A.3
MORE ON RELATIVE POSITIONAL ENCODINGS
Here, we discuss how our formalization of Relative Positional Encodings (RPEs) relates to prior
work on RPEs. Recall that we define Relative Positional Encodings (RPEs) as subsets R Ď N ˆ N,
defining attention weights as:
¯w “ softmaxplog n ¨ tvT
j KT Qvi ` λrrRsspi, jq
looooomooooon
RPE term
ui
j“1q.
(14)
The key is the RPE term, which adds a position-dependent bias to the attention logits. Here, we
interpret λ as a bias term and rrRsspi, jq as 1 if pi, jq P rrRss; otherwise, it is 0.
Oue formalization abstracts additive relative positional encodings (additive RPEs), which add a
position-dependent term to the attention logits (Shaw et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2021;
Press et al., 2022; He et al., 2021). Schemes in the literature differ in whether they are parameter-
free (e.g., Press et al. (2022)) or involve learnable parameters. We consider the especially simple
case where R is determined a-priori, parameter-free, and independent of the task at hand. Here, we
review relevant prior work on additive RPEs; we write qi :“ Qvi and kj :“ Kvj for brevity.
1. (Shaw et al., 2018): Here, the RPE term is qT
i ai´j, where ai´j is a learned embedding
depending on the relative distance i ´ j (their Eq. 5).
2. (Dai et al., 2019): Here, the RPE term is qT
i ri´j ` uT kj ` vT ri´j, where ri´j is a learned
embedding depending on the relative distance i ´ j, and u, v are learned global vectors.
3. (Xue et al., 2021): Here, the RPE term is bi´j, where bi´j is a learned scalar bias depending
on the relative distance i ´ j.
4. (Press et al., 2022): Here, the RPE term is m ¨ pi ´ jq, where m is a learned scalar slope.
5. (He et al., 2021): Here, the RPE term is qT
i ri´j ` uT kj ` vT ri´j, where ri´j is a learned
embedding depending on the relative distance i ´ j, and u, v are learned global vectors.
This is very similar to Dai et al. (2019).
Another popular class of RPEs are multiplicative RPEs, which transform the key and query vectors
with position-dependent matrices (Su et al., 2024). Our RPEs are closest to those of (Xue et al.,
2021) and (Press et al., 2022), as they involve adding a scalar bias to the attention logits. Whereas
(Xue et al., 2021) learn a separate bias for each possible relative distance, we only require a single
R determined a-priori, with no learnable parameters beyond the scalar λ. In our theoretical analysis,
this parameter-free nature is useful for length generalization, ensuring that the number of learned
parameters need not increase with the input length.
A.4
PRIMER ON HUANG ET AL. (2025)
As our results build on Huang et al. (2025), we provide a brief primer on their key definitions and
results here. We define both syntax and semantics of C-RASP in the main paper. Here, we provide
a simple example, illustrating the formal language L “ Σ˚abΣ˚, taken from Huang et al. (2025):
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C ´ RASP program for L “ Σ˚abΣ˚ over Σ “ ta, bu (from Huang et al. (2025))
Ca´piq :“ # rj ď i, j “ i ´ 1s Qapjq
# of immediately preceding a
(1)
Pa´piq :“ Ca´piq ě 1
Position i ´ 1 holds an a
(2)
Qabpiq :“ Qbpiq ^ Pa´piq
A substring ab ends at position i
(3)
Cabpiq :“ # rj ď is Qabpjq
# of substrings ab
(4)
Lpiq :“ Cabpiq ě 1
At least one ab precedes position i (5)
We now introduce the key definitions and results from Huang et al. (2025) that we build on. As we
focus on No Positional Encodings (NoPE) and Relative Positional Encodings (RPE) transformers,
we only define the relevant hypothesis classes here; this makes the analysis easier than in Huang
et al. (2025), who also consider APE transformers, which caused a substantial amount of further
complexity. In particular, the assumption of “translation invariance” used by Huang et al. (2025) is
not needed here.
The idealized learning procedure of Huang et al. (2025) is centered around minimizing a regularizer
R mapping transformers T to numbers, favoring simpler and smaller transformers. It is defined in
terms of (i) the number of heads, (ii) the precision used in the transformer’s attention computations,
(iii) the ranks and norms of the various parameter matrices and vectors. The learning model ap-
plies to the class F of length-preserving functions f mapping strings to sequences of vectors. The
idealized learning procedure (“Inference Procedure”) is then defined as follows:
Definition A.1 (Inference Procedure, from Huang et al. (2025)). Given a function f P F, the
Inference Procedure obtains a sequence of transformers T1, T2, . . . as follows. Define Un as the set
of transformers matching the behavior of f on all inputs of length ď n
2 . Then choose Tn P Un such
that
RpTnq ď 1
n ` inf
T PUn RpTq
(6)
Here, the term 1
n is used because the class Un is infinite and the infimum may not be attained;
approximate minimization of the regularizer is sufficient. Depending on whether we consider NoPE
or RPE transformers, the transformers Tn are taken from the corresponding hypothesis class with
NoPE or RPE.
Huang et al. (2025) then show that length generalization in this learning model is equivalent to
expressibility by a class of idealized transformers called Limit Transformers. As we focus on the
NoPE and RPE cases, the result simplifies to the following statement:
Theorem A.2 (Guaranteed Length Generalization in the Limit, simplified from Huang et al. (2025)).
Let f P F. Then the following are equivalent:
1. f is expressible by a single transformer that computes f across all input lengths (NoPE or
RPE).
2. (Guaranteed Length Generalization) Applying the Inference Procedure from Definition A.1
(either in the NoPE or RPE setup, matching the encoding in (1)) to f generates a sequence
T1, T2, . . . with supn“1,2,3,... RpTnq ă 8, for which there is some N0 such that, for all
m ą N0, Tm matches f on all inputs of any length k ď m.
These definitions and results concern an idealized learning procedure that assumes that all data up
to input length n
2 is fitted perfectly for training; recent follow-up work has expanded by providing
more quantitative analyses when only finite data is available (Chen et al., 2025; Izzo et al., 2025).
Huang et al. (2025) further provide a translation from C-RASP to transformers, which we build on
in our results.
B
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL ON SECTION 3
In this subsection, we prove Proposition 3.3 from Proposition 3.4.
Suppose Σ “ ta1, . . . , anu. If L Ď a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n is recursively enumerable, then so is the language K “
tu P Σ˚ | Dv P L: Ψpuq “ Ψpvqu of all permutations of L. Moreover, K is permutation-invariant,
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
and thus recognized by a CoT C-RASP according to Proposition 3.4. Since L “ K X a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n, to
turn that CoT C-RASP into a CoT C-RASP for L, it remains to check that the input word belongs to
the set a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n. Therefore, for all rules Oa Ð P, where P is a C-RASP expression, we use
Oa Ð P ^
ľ
1ďiăjďn
ÐÝ
#rQai ^ ÐÝ
#rQajs ą 0s “ 0,
where the second conjunct says that there are no positions carrying an ai that have at least one aj
with j ą i to their left. Then, the modified C-RASP clearly recognizes K X a˚
1 ¨ ¨ ¨ a˚
n “ L.
C
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL ON SECTION 4
Details of Phase II
In this section, we present the details of Phase II of the construction in Sec-
tion 4. For this, first observe that
S “ tx P Nn | σpxq P Lu
is recursively enumerable, since the partial function σ is computable. Therefore, by Lemma 3.5,
there is a pn ` 3q-counter machine pP, ∆, q0, Fq such that for any x P Nn, we have x P S if and
only if from the configuration pq0, x, 0, 0, 0q, the counter machine eventually reaches a control state
in F.
We simulate a step of the counter machine using the following rule. If the CoT C-RASP finds the
letter τ as the last letter, then for each possible next transition τ 1, it checks whether its guard φτ 1 is
satisfied, and if so, executes τ 1 by outputting τ 1. Thus, we have
Oτ 1 Ð φτ 1pt1, . . . , tn`3q ^ Qτ
for any two transitions τ, τ 1 P ∆for which tgtpτq “ srcpτ 1q. Here, t1, . . . , tn`3 are the following
terms:
ti “ Xi `
ÿ
ρP∆
uρpiq ¨ ÐÝ
#rQρs
for i “ 1, . . . , n, and
ti “
ÿ
ρP∆
uρpiq ¨ ÐÝ
#rQρs
for i “ n ` 1, n ` 2, n ` 3,
where Xi is the count-valued C-RASP term from (12). For i P tn ` 1, n ` 2, n ` 3u, ti is just the
sum of counter effects on counter i. Equivalently, ti is the current value of counter i after executing
all these transitions. For i P r1, ns, ti we also add Xi, which has the effect that the counters 1, . . . , n
are initialized with Xi.
Finally, our CoT C-RASP accepts if the output symbol is any τ P ∆with tgtpτq P F.
Other Proofs
Proof of Lemma 4.2. If L is recognized by a CoT C-RASP, then it is also recognized by an SMAT
C-RASP by Lemma 2.1. In fact, our model of SMAT is equivalent to the NoPE special case of
the Limit Transformers of Huang et al. (2025). Now Theorem 12 in Huang et al. (2025) shows the
following: Take any k. For each string w P Σ˚, let Fpwq P Γ˚ YΓω be the associated CoT by which
the language is recognized via an SMAT. Assume Alice has access to the prefix of wFpwq of length
k, and Bob has access to the remainder, then Alice needs to communicate just Oplog kq bits to allow
Bob to compute the output of the SMAT at all positions k ` 1, k ` 2, . . . . In fact, Theorem 12 in
Huang et al. (2025) is stated for the special case where k is half the input length, but the argument
is entirely general, as it only relies on the length of Alice’s part.
Note that, if the CoT terminates before k ´ |w| steps, Alice can just communicate that. Now given
the SMAT recognizes L via CoT, Bob can determine4 from Alice’s communication if a given string
is in the language or not.
Now we construct a family of NFAs accepting the language as follows.
4This is not decidable, but Bob in this model is a computationally unconstrained agent, with communication
between Alice and Bob as the only bottleneck.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
For x, y P Σ˚, define x ”AB y if and only if, for all z P Σ˚, Alice communicates the same to
Bob on xz and yz. By definition, each equivalence class of this relation is a subclass of a Nerode
equivalence class of L (:).
Given any length bound n P N, let Qn be the set of all ”AB-classes represented by at least some
words of length ď n. By the result described above, |Qn| is bounded by ď řn
k“1 2Oplog kq “
Oppolypnqq. Now, by definition of the congruence, Qn is the state set of an automaton computing
”AB-equivalence classes. By (:), it recognizes L.
We remark that this proof also applies even if we augment transformers with learned Absolute
Positional Encodings (APE), because Theorem 12 in Huang et al. (2025) also applies to the APE-
augmented case when the APE embeddings are learned.
D
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL ON SECTION 5
D.1
DATASET CONSTRUCTION
For each task shown in Table 2, we generate paired datasets of input strings and k-CM output traces
under two encoding regimes: Unary and Binary encoding.
Language
Unary Representation
Binary Representation
Prime
t ap : p P P u
t binppq : p P P u
Exponential
t a2i : i ě 0 u
t binpiq#binpjq : j “ 2i u
Division
t aibj : j | i u
t binpiq#binpjq : j | i u
Greatest Common Divisor
t aibjck : k “ gcdpi, jq u
t binpiq#binpjq#binpkq : k “ gcdpi, jq u
Multiplication
t aibjck : k “ i ¨ j u
t binpiq#binpjq#binpkq : k “ i ˆ j u
Table 2: Unary and Binary representation of arithmetic languages. Here P is the set of prime num-
bers, j | i denotes divisibility, gcdpi, jq is the greatest common divisor, and i ˆ j is multiplication.
Unary Encoding.
In the unary setting, we work over small alphabets such as tau for Prime, ta, bu
for Exponential, and Division and ta, b, cu for Greatest Common Divisor and Multiplication. Here,
input strings w are sampled uniformly at random from these alphabets within given length ranges,
without enforcing that they encode tuples of integers satisfying the intended arithmetic relation (e.g.
words are not constrained to be of the form aibjck).
Given a deterministic k-counter machine (or k-CM)
M “ pP, ∆, q0, Fq,
and a unary word w P Σ˚, we view w simply as an input to M. Since M is deterministic, the run of
M on w is uniquely defined. Writing w “ w1w2 ¨ ¨ ¨ w|w|, the induced computation is the sequence
pq0, c0q w1
ÝÝÑ pq1, c1q w2
ÝÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨
w|w|
ÝÝÝÑ pq|w|, c|w|q,
where pqt, ctq denotes the configuration after reading the t-th symbol of w.
For a transition τ “ pp, φ, q, uq P ∆, we use the standard notation srcpτq :“ p, tgtpτq :“ q,
φτ :“ φ, and uτ :“ u. The target sequence associated with w is then defined as
targetpwq :“
`
τt
˘|w|
t“1,
where τt is the unique transition of M taken at step t of the above run. Because M is deterministic,
the sequence targetpwq is well-defined and uniquely determined by w.
Binary Encoding.
In the binary setting, integers are represented in canonical binary form (with
no leading zeros), over alphabets Σ P
␣
t0, 1u, t0, 1, {u
(
. For the tasks Greatest Common Divisor
and Multiplication, we construct inputs of the form binpxq { binpyq { binpzq, while Exponential
and Division use binary pairs binpwq { binpvq, and Prime uses a single binary encoding binpnq.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Each binary sample is labelled positive when the intended arithmetic relation holds (e.g., z “ x ` y,
z “ x ¨ y, z “ gcdpx, yq, w | v, z “ xy, or n is prime). Negative samples are generated by
replacing the input component with a nearby but incorrect integer that satisfies the required bit-
length constraints.
As in the unary setting, the input string is fed directly to the model, and the supervision signal is
given by the K-CM trace obtained by running the corresponding deterministic k-CM on this binary
input; thus the target sequence is uniquely defined.
D.2
DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Prompt and Predicted Output.
For every input string w, we prepare the model input in a
prefix–LM format.
The model receives the prompt
SOS
INPUT
SEP
where INPUT de-
notes either the unary or binary representation of the original string w. After the separator to-
ken, the model is required to autoregressively generate the target region TARGET
EOS where
TARGET encodes τpwq, the unique accumulator trace produced by the deterministic k-CM when
executed on w.
Thus the complete input–target sequence used during training has the form
SOS
INPUT
SEP
TARGET
EOS .
During training, we apply the standard autoregressive language modeling objective, but we restrict
the cross-entropy loss to the TARGET region (TARGET--EOS), ensuring that the model learns to
generate the target trace τpwq conditioned on the INPUT prefix. At evaluation time, we report
exact match (EM) over the entire predicted output region: an example receives score 1 if the model’s
generated sequence matches τpwq exactly, and 0 otherwise.
Architecture and hyperparamters
All models in this work are trained from scratch, without any
pretrained weights. We use a decoder-Only Transformer architecture LLaMA, but with the standard
SwiGLU activation replaced by a ReLU nonlinearity in all feed-forward blocks. Beyond the acti-
vation change, we also modify the positional encoding mechanism: the Unary representation uses
NoPE, whereas the Binary representation uses our relative positional encodings. Apart from these
substitutions, the model follows the standard LLaMA design, including multi-head self-attention,
layer normalization, and residual connections. Our empirical results show that the architecture per-
forms robustly under both the Unary and Binary encodings considered in this work.
The hyperparameters used for each task are listed in Table 3, including the number of layers, atten-
tion heads, embedding dimension, learning rate, and maximum training steps.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Language
Representation
Model Size
LR
Max Steps
Prime
Unary
1 layer; 1 head; 32 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryR
1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryN
6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim
1e–3
30k
Exponential
Unary
1 layer; 1 head; 32 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryR
1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryN
6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim
1e–3
30k
Division
Unary
4 layer; 2 head; 128 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryR
1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryN
6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim
1e–3
30k
Greatest Common Divisor
Unary
3 layer; 1 head; 128 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryR
1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryN
6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim
1e–3
30k
Multiplication
Unary
3 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryR
1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim
1e–3
30k
BinaryN
6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim
1e–3
30k
Table 3: Hyperparameters used for training LLaMA-style decoder-only Transformers on each task,
across the Unary (NoPE) and Binary (BinaryR with RPEs, BinaryN without RPEs) representations.
All models use ReLU activations and are trained from scratch with AdamW. Weight decay is 0.01
for Prime, Exponential, and GCD; 0.05 for Division; and 0.03 for Multiplication.
21