--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
QUASI MONTE CARLO METHODS ENABLE EXTREMELY
LOW-DIMENSIONAL DEEP GENERATIVE MODELS
Miles Martinez1,2,∗, Alex H. Williams3,4,⋄
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2 Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University
3 Center for Neural Science, New York University
4 Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
∗miles.martinez@duke.edu, ⋄alex.h.williams@nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces quasi-Monte Carlo latent variable models (QLVMs): a
class of deep generative models that are specialized for finding extremely low-
dimensional and interpretable embeddings of high-dimensional datasets.
Un-
like standard approaches, which rely on a learned encoder and variational lower
bounds, QLVMs directly approximate the marginal likelihood by randomized
quasi-Monte Carlo integration. While this brute force approach has drawbacks
in higher-dimensional spaces, we find that it excels in fitting one, two, and three
dimensional deep latent variable models. Empirical results on a range of datasets
show that QLVMs consistently outperform conventional variational autoencoders
(VAEs) and importance weighted autoencoders (IWAEs) with matched latent di-
mensionality. The resulting embeddings enable transparent visualization and post
hoc analyses such as nonparametric density estimation, clustering, and geodesic
path computation, which are nontrivial to validate in higher-dimensional spaces.
While our approach is compute-intensive and struggles to generate fine-scale de-
tails in complex datasets, it offers a compelling solution for applications prioritiz-
ing interpretability and latent space analysis.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep generative models are a mainstay of contemporary machine learning. In addition to synthe-
sizing complex images, sounds, and sentences, many researchers have sought to use these models
to identify human-interpretable representations of complex data distributions. For example, vari-
ational autoencoders (VAEs) have been applied in scientific analysis of motor kinematics (Luxem
et al., 2022), vocal communication patterns (Goffinet et al., 2021), single cell gene expression (Ding
et al., 2018; Grønbech et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2022), neural population dynamics (Pandarinath et al.,
2018), and extracellular spike waveforms (Beau et al., 2025).
Reducing dimensionality is seen as a key step towards interpretability in these models. VAEs achieve
this by introducing a bottleneck layer. The size of this layer is a hyperparameter and often it is chosen
to be modestly large. For VAEs, typical values are in the range of 32-128 latent dimensions and re-
construction quality is reported to drop off for networks with fewer than ~10 dimensions (Mai Ngoc
& Hwang, 2020). As a result, it is virtually universal practice to employ further dimensionality
reduction methods like UMAP or t-SNE to visualize the latent space of a VAE. Many papers also
apply analyses such as clustering to identify human-interpretable structure in the latent space (see
e.g., Goffinet et al., 2021; Luxem et al., 2022; Peterson et al., 2024; Koukuntla et al., 2025). Even in
moderately high dimensions, these post hoc analyses are non-trivial to tune and validate.
Here, we demonstrate that in many cases two or three dimensional latent spaces are sufficient for
performant deep generative models. Contrary to conventional wisdom (see, e.g., Doersch, 2016), we
find that numerical integration can be a viable strategy to marginalize over the latent variables. We
use randomized lattice integration rules (Dick et al., 2022) to approximate the marginal likelihood.
We call the resulting model a quasi-Monte Carlo latent variable model, or QLVM. Although our
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
method requires multiple passes through the decoder on each training iteration, it completely elim-
inates variational approximations that can be challenging to tune and optimize (see Rainforth et al.,
2018; He et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020; Kinoshita et al., 2023, and Fig. 3 in this paper). Ultimately,
we find that this approach decisively outperforms VAEs with comparable architectures and can even
rival the performance of VAEs with higher capacity latent spaces.
Despite the limitations of our approach (see §4.2), there are many advantages to learning extremely
low-dimensional embeddings of high-dimensional datasets. We can, for example, use kernel density
estimators—which suffer a curse of dimensionality in higher dimensions—to precisely characterize
the aggregate posterior density over the latent space. We can also exhaustively characterize the
smoothness of the embedding by querying the Jacobian of the decoder network over a dense grid of
points. We demonstrate how this information can be used to aid clustering analyses in §3.3, but the
potential applications extend much more broadly to other topological analyses (Wasserman, 2018).
Altogether, our results highlight a simple, but widely overlooked, approach to building extremely
low-dimensional deep latent variable models for exploratory analysis.
2
METHODOLOGY
2.1
BACKGROUND ON DEEP LATENT VARIABLE MODELS
Let xi ∈RD for i ∈{1, . . . , n} denote a sequence of high-dimensional, observed data points. Deep
latent variable models seek to explain such datasets through the following probabilistic model:
xi ∼pθ(xi | zi)
where
zi ∼p(z)
(1)
independently for i ∈{1, . . . , n}. Here, a d-dimensional latent variable vector zi is drawn from
a prior distribution p(z).1 The likelihood of each observation is parameterized by a deep network,
called the decoder, with trainable weights θ. We use fθ(zi) = E[xi | zi] to denote the mean output
of the decoder. Ideally, the decoder weights would be trained to maximize the marginal likelihood:
pθ(x1, . . . , xn) =
n
Y
i=1
pθ(xi) =
n
Y
i=1
Z
pθ(xi | zi)p(zi)dzi
(2)
Computing the marginal likelihood of a datapoint requires integrating over all possible values of zi.
This integration is challenging in high dimensions and the simple-minded Monte Carlo estimate,
pθ(xi) =
Z
pθ(xi | zi)p(zi)dzi ≈1
m
m
X
j=1
pθ(xi | zi =ezj)
(3)
where ez1, . . . , ezm are independent samples from p(z), is therefore typically dismissed (Doersch,
2016; Mattei & Frellsen, 2018; Kingma et al., 2019). However, the quality of this approximation
only deteriorates in proportion to the variance of pθ(x | z) for z ∼p(z) (see Owen, 2013). Thus,
for sufficiently simple datasets, it is plausible that eq. (3) may suffice as a criterion to train θ. To our
knowledge, this possibility has not been seriously explored in deep latent variable models.
Since computing pθ(xi) is often difficult, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs; Kingma & Welling
2014) instead target a lower bound on log pθ(xi). To do this, VAEs introduce a second deep neural
network with parameters ϕ called the encoder. For each datapoint the encoder outputs a conditional
distribution qϕ(z | xi), which acts as a variational approximation to the posterior distribution of zi
given xi. As a training objective, one considers:
L(i)
ELBO(θ, ϕ) = 1
m
m
X
j=1
log pθ(xi | ezj, θ) −D(qϕ(z | xi) ∥p(z))
(4)
where ez1, . . . , ezm are independent samples from qϕ(z | xi) and D(·∥·) denotes the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence. In the limit that m →∞, this converges to a lower bound on log pθ(xi)
called the evidence lower bound (ELBO). Typically, m = 1 sample is used to obtain an unbiased
estimate of the lower bound. For further background see Doersch (2016); Kingma et al. (2019).
1Following common practice in this literature, we use the same notation for both the probability distribution
of a random variable and its associated density function. We also refer to the two interchangeably.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 1:
(A) On each batch, latent samples are generated by uniformly shifting a lattice of M
points (Batch 1 grid and batch B grid denote examples of samples that may appear during training).
(B) These samples are fed through a shared decoder, fθ, to produce reconstructed datapoints (e.g.
MNIST digits). During training, a log-sum-exp (LSE) reduction operator is applied to a vector of
log probabilities, log p = log p(xi | ˜zj), to calculate eq. (5) up to a constant. (C) To approximate
the latent posterior, p(z | xi), the same vector of log probabilities is normalized to form a discrete
approximation over the m lattice points. This employs Bayes’ rule as described in the main text.
2.2
QUASI-MONTE CARLO LATENT VARIABLE MODELS (QLVMS)
VAEs target a lower bound on the marginal log likelihood, which is only tight when qϕ(z | xi)
matches the true posterior distribution of z given xi. Commonly, qϕ is assumed to follow a simple
form—e.g. Gaussian with diagonal covariance. In very low-dimensional latent spaces, we will see
that this assumption can be violated and, even if it approximately holds, the true posterior can be so
narrow that it is difficult for the encoder network to learn (see Fig. 3).
We therefore sought to understand whether the simple Monte Carlo approach shown in eq. (3) can
be practical in situations of interest. By taking logarithms on both sides of eq. (3), we obtain:
L(i)
MC(θ) = log pθ(xi) = log

1
m
m
X
j=1
pθ(xi | ezj)


(5)
where xi is any datapoint and ez1, . . . , ezm are sampled points in the latent space. This is a lower
bound on the marginal log likelihood in expectation. Indeed, by Jensen’s inequality:
E
h
log
h
1
m
P
j pθ(xi | ezj)
ii
≤log
h
E
h
1
m
P
j pθ(xi | ezj)
ii
= log pθ(xi)
(6)
where the expectation is taken over ez1, . . . , ezm. The inequality becomes tight as m →∞, since
Var[ 1
m
P
j pθ(xi | ezj)] →0 in this limit (see Struski et al., 2023, for a detailed analysis). Thus, we
achieve a more accurate estimate of the log marginal likelihood as we increase the computational
budget (i.e. sample size) of our method. Moreover, the final equality in eq. (6) holds so long as
the marginal distribution of each ezj is p(z). This observation motivates quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC)
methods, which jointly sample the points ez1, . . . , ezm to encourage uniform spacing while preserving
the appropriate marginal distribution for each sample (L’Ecuyer, 2016; Owen, 2023).
To our knowledge, QMC has only been considered by a handful of researchers in the context of
deep generative models. Buchholz et al. (2018) applied this approach to reduce the variance of
ELBO estimates—i.e., to reduce variance in eq. (4) instead of eq. (5). More recently, Andral (2024)
applied randomized QMC to generative models based on normalizing flows—a class of models
which is poorly suited to our motivating application of nonlinear dimensionality reduction.
In our experiments, we set p(z) = 1, i.e. uniform over [0, 1)d, and we sample ez1, . . . , ezm jointly
as a randomly shifted lattice (Fig. 1A). For d = 2, we use Fibonacci lattices, which optimally tile
the unit square under periodic boundary conditions (Breneis & Hinrichs, 2020). For d = 3 we
use Korobov lattices (see Owen, 2023, ch. 16.1). Although lattice integration rules can be applied
to non-periodic functions (see Dick et al., 2022, ch. 7), we focus on latent spaces with periodic
boundaries. To impose this desired boundary condition, we fix z 7→(sin z, cos z) as the first layer
of the decoder. We call the resulting model a quasi-Monte Carlo latent variable model, or QLVM.
During training, we simply compute eq. (5) over the lattice, leveraging a log-sum-exp operation for
numerical stability (Fig. 1B). Note that there is no need to train an encoder network. At evaluation
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
time, we generate samples from a QLVM in the usual fashion by sampling z ∼p(z) and feeding z
through the decoder to evaluate fθ(z). To project high-dimensional data into the low-dimensional
embedding space, we appeal to Bayes’ rule, which tells us that p(zi | xi) ∝pθ(xi | zi), due to
the uniform prior on zi. We can therefore approximate the posterior as a normalized mixture of m
Dirac masses, with weights proportional to pθ(xi | ezj) over lattice points (Fig. 1C). One can use the
mean or mode of this approximate posterior as a low-dimensional embedding of xi.
Changing the prior distribution. As mentioned above, our experiments in §3 employ a latent space
with periodic boundary conditions and a uniform prior. The uniform prior encourages points to be
evenly spread and the periodic boundary conditions prevent embedded points from getting “stuck”
in corners of the space. Additionally, lattice rules often have optimality properties for periodic
functions (Breneis & Hinrichs, 2020), though they still work well for non-periodic functions.
It is very easy to adapt QLVMs to different sets of assumptions on the latent space. Indeed, a
model uniform prior over the latent space is, in some sense, universal. Suppose that we wish to
build a QLVM where u denotes the latent random variable and p(u) denotes its prior. Under mild
conditions, we can construct this as a one-to-one mapping u = Φ−1(z) where z is a uniform
random variable and Φ−1 is the inverse CDF of p(u). Thus, to construct a QLVM with a prior
distribution p(u), we can simply train a QLVM with a uniform prior over z, but use u = Φ−1(z)
as the input to the decoder. This approach is common in the QMC literature and is often called the
inversion method (see Chpt. 4 in Owen 2013 and Chpt. 8 in Leobacher & Pillichshammer 2014).
In appendix E.2 we show an example QLVM trained with respect to an isotropic Gaussian prior
distribution on MNIST. This example model performs comparably well to a QLVM with a uniform
prior.
2.3
RELATIONSHIP TO IMPORTANCE WEIGHTED AUTOENCODERS (IWAES)
Importance weighted autoencoders (IWAEs, Burda et al., 2016) are a generalization of VAEs that
target a different lower bound on the marginal log likelihood:
L(i)
IWAE(θ, ϕ) = log

1
m
m
X
j=1
pθ(xi | ezj)p(ezj)
qϕ(ezj | xi)


(7)
where qϕ represents the density of the proposal distribution (output by the encoder network) and
ez1, . . . , ezm are independent samples from this distribution. One can show that the ELBO is re-
covered when m = 1. Further, so long as qϕ places nonzero density over the latent space, L(i)
IWAE
becomes, in expectation, a progressively tighter bound and approaches the true marginal log like-
lihood as m →∞(Burda et al., 2016). Thus, IWAEs and QLVMs enjoy the same asymptotic
theoretical advantages over standard VAEs. They also suffer similar computational drawbacks—in
both, the quality of the lower bound comes at the cost of multiple forward and backward passes
through the decoder. In IWAEs, multiple backward passes through the encoder are also required.
IWAEs are closely related to QLVMs. The major difference is that IWAEs use an encoder to learn
a proposal distribution, qϕ, while QLVMs draw samples from a fixed distribution—the prior. In this
sense, QLVMs are a special case of an IWAE with a fixed proposal. Below we summarize two key
reasons why fixing the proposal distribution may be advantageous from a practical perspective.
Learning Good Proposals is Hard. A bad proposal can lead to a lower bound with extremely high
variance (see Owen, 2013, Ch. 9). It is costly to monitor the variance of the IWAE lower bound
during training and unclear how to intervene to fix problems that arise. A second, less obvious,
challenge to training IWAEs was revealed by Rainforth et al. (2018), who showed that increasing
m can simultaneously improve optimization of the decoder weights, θ, while deteriorating the opti-
mization of encoder weights, ϕ. Roughly speaking, this occurs because the IWAE bound becomes
more insensitive to the proposal as m →∞, and the magnitude of the gradient signal is averaged
away quicker than the variance is reduced. See Tucker et al. (2018); Nowozin (2018); Morningstar
et al. (2021) for further discussion.
Computational Benefits of QLVMs. QLVMs avoid the need to learn an encoder network. This
saves GPU memory (since encoder weights and activations don’t need to be stored), computation
time (since gradients don’t need to be backpropogated through the encoder), and hyperparameter
sweeps (since the encoder network and optimizer don’t need to be tuned). In addition to all of
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: (A) Marginal log likelihood estimates on heldout test data from 2D models (orange) across
three datasets (QMC estimate for QLVMs, ELBO for VAE and IWAE). The QLVM bound is higher
than the ELBO and IWAE bound across all 2D models. Error bars indicate 1 standard deviation
across 10 random seeds. (B) Reconstructions for a 2-D QLVM and VAE, with the QLVM display-
ing higher-quality reconstructions. (C) Samples from the prior of a 2-D QLVM, VAE, and IWAE.
QLVMs show greater sample quality and sample diversity.
these benefits, training with minibatches is much more efficient with QLVMs because the randomly
shifted lattice of latent points (see Fig. 1) can be re-used across all elements in the minibatch. There
is no simple way to re-use samples in an IWAE because, for two datapoints x and x′, the proposal
distributions qϕ(z | x) and qϕ(z | x′) may be very different. Thus, for a given batch size, b, and total
budget of latent samples, s, an IWAE will be constrained to use m = s/b samples per datapoint,
whereas a QLVM can utilize m latent samples to estimate the loss for each datapoint.
3
RESULTS
3.1
QLVMS PERFORM FAVORABLY IN VERY LOW-DIMENSIONAL SETTINGS
As discussed in §2, prior work regards the (quasi-)Monte Carlo estimator used by QLVMs as imprac-
tical. Here, we show that: (a) QLVMs outperform VAEs and other deep latent variable models when
the latent space is constrained to be two-dimensional, (b) QLVMs’ performance is better than one
might expect in this setting across a variety of non-trivial benchmarks, and (c) in low-dimensional
settings, the lower bounds targeted by standard VAEs and IWAEs are often loose.
We fit models to two image datasets (MNIST and grayscale Celeb-A), an acoustic library of bird
song syllables (from Goffinet et al., 2021), and an acoustic library of Mongolian gerbil vocalizations
(from Peterson et al., 2024). We compared two-dimensional QLVM models to two-dimensional
VAE and IWAE models. Experimental details including preprocessing and network architectures
are described in §B. Importantly, we used the same decoder architecture for all models to ensure fair
comparisons.
In all cases, 2D QLVMs outperformed 2D VAE and 2D IWAE models both quantitatively in terms
of reconstruction error (Fig. 2A), and qualitatively on example reconstructions (Fig. 2B). Moreover,
novel samples found by sampling z ∼p(z) and feeding z through the decoder were, qualitatively,
more diverse and of higher quality when derived from a QLVM than from VAE and IWAE models
with matched latent dimensionality (Fig. 2C).
As one would expect, we found that VAEs with higher dimensional latent spaces often quantita-
tively outperformed 2D QLVMs—particularly on the most rich and challenging dataset of Celeb-A
images. We show comparisons between 2D QLVMs and VAEs with various latent dimensionalities
in appendix G. On simple datasets, such as MNIST or the zebra finch dataset, the improvements of
higher-dimensional VAEs are qualitatively minor albeit still quantitatively detectable. In short, while
2D QLVMs struggle to capture fine-scale detail in complex datasets (e.g. high resolution natural im-
ages), they perform “good enough” on many other datasets of interest to scientists and engineers.
Thus, QLVMs are an attractive method when 2D visualizations are desired.
Finally, we investigated the underlying reasons why VAE and IWAE models underperform in ex-
tremely low-dimensional latent spaces. We hypothesized that the encoder network struggles to iden-
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 3: (A) VAE and IWAE lower bounds on marginal log likelihood (orange dots) for 2D latent
spaces vs. the QMC estimate based on VAE and IWAE decoders (blue dots) from Fig. 2. Black
horizontal line indicates the 2D QLVM bound on the marginal log likelihood. The gap between the
blue dots and the black line represents the additional benefit of training with QMC samples. (B)
Empirical vs. variational posteriors for MNIST, Celeb-A, and zebra finch vocalizations. Heatmap
indicates 99% of probability mass in the empirical posterior (estimated by a dense lattice), while
the red dots and ellipses indicate means and ±3 standard deviation of the variational posterior. This
panel is best viewed on screen with magnification.
tify a good approximation to the latent posterior in these settings, resulting in a loose bound and
a poor training signal for the decoder. To assess this, we took the decoders from trained 2D VAE
and 2D IWAE models and applied the quasi-Monte Carlo integration rule in eq. (5) to get a tight
estimate of the marginal log likelihood and the true posterior (using m = 6724 lattice points). This
revealed that the bounds targeted by VAE and IWAE models were loose (Fig. 3A – blue dots are
higher than orange, all p < 0.05 using one-sided binomial tests, Bonferroni corrected). Notably,
tightening these bounds at evaluation time only did not immediately close the performance gap be-
tween VAE/IWAE baseline decoders and the QLVM decoder (Fig. 3A – blue dots below horizontal
black line), demonstrating that our approach using the tighter QMC bound during training resulted
in improved performance at evaluation time.
We then visualized these model posteriors as heatmaps, which qualitatively revealed that the VAE
and IWAE variational approximations were often, though not always, poorly matched to the true
posterior (Fig. 3B). Altogether, this analysis confirmed our suspicion that the encoder networks
struggle to identify a good variational approximation over very low-dimensional latent spaces, mo-
tivating our approach to remove the encoder network entirely and instead use QMC to estimate the
marginal log likelihood.
3.2
COMPUTATIONAL COST OF QLVMS
The quasi-Monte Carlo estimator used by QLVMs may appear to be computationally restrictive,
even in low-dimensional spaces. For a fixed choice of decoder architecture, the tradeoff between
QLVM performance and computational cost of training is mediated by the number of lattice points,
m, over the latent space. The comparable parameter for IWAEs is k, the number of importance
samples per data point in the batch. We therefore varied these hyperparameters and plotted model
performance (negative ELBO for VAEs and IWAEs, negative QMC evidence bound for QLVMs)
after 300 epochs, MNIST and zebra finch, or 10 epochs, Celeb-A) against computation time (the
wall time to complete an epoch of training using one NVIDIA H100 GPU). This experiment traces
out a 1D curve that represents the Pareto front of the QLVM model class (red lines in Fig. 4).
Intuitively, any competing model that falls above or to the right of this curve is suboptimal to the
QLVM—regardless of whether computational efficiency is prioritized over reconstruction error, or
vice versa. Indeed, we observed that 2D VAE and 2D IWAE models with various architectures and
hyperparameter settings consistently fell either above or to the right of the Pareto front, indicating
underperformance.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 4: Performance vs. computational cost curves for 2D QLVMs (red), VAEs (green), and
IWAEs (purple) on MNIST, Celeb-A, and zebra finch datasets. Curves closer to the lower left quad-
rant of each plot indicate a more favorable tradeoff. See §3.2 and appendix B.3 for comparison
details.
Figure 5: (A) Latent embeddings of MNIST, colored by digit. (B) Aggregated posterior of MNIST with
mean-shift centroids (red) overlaid. (C) Reconstructions of centroids in (B). (D) Smoothed Frobe-
nius norm of decoder Jacobian on MNIST, with centroids from (B) overlaid. (E) Latent embeddings
of gerbil vocalizations, colored by mean frequency of the vocalization. (F) Aggregated posterior of
gerbil vocalizations, with mean-shift centroids (red) overlaid. (G) Reconstructions of centroids from
(F). (H) Smoothed log Frobenius norm of decoder Jacobian on gerbil vocalizations.
3.3
USING QLVMS FOR CLUSTERING
Clustering is a notoriously challenging, yet popular, form of unsupervised analysis. Identifying
clusters is particularly difficult in high-dimensional spaces where conventional distance metrics (e.g.
Euclidean) become less informative (Aggarwal et al., 2001). To address this, many works apply
clustering algorithms on lower dimensional data representations that have been learned by a VAE or
similar method (see e.g. Yan et al., 2022; Hadipour et al., 2022; Peterson et al., 2024). Since VAE
performance is often compromised when the latent space is very low-dimensional, this approach
still requires running a clustering algorithm in tens or hundreds of latent dimensions. Clustering is
nontrivial in this setting, leading practitioners to introduce questionable parametric assumptions on
the shape of each cluster (e.g. spherical in the case of K-means clustering).
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
To investigate the ability of QLVMs to help reveal clusters in high-dimensional datasets, we first
examined 2D embeddings of the MNIST dataset. Using the procedure outlined in Fig. 1C, each data-
point was embedded into a 2D latent space and colored by the ground truth digit label (Fig. 5A). We
also visualized the aggregated posterior density as a 2D histogram (Fig. 5B).2 By visual examina-
tion, one can tell the clusters in Fig. 5A do not follow a simple or pre-specified shape. This motivates
us to consider nonparametric clustering methods and related methods from topological data analysis
(Wasserman, 2018). In Fig. 5C, we show the cluster centroids produced by the mean-shift algo-
rithm (Cheng, 1995), whose locations are labeled in Fig. 5B. A single hyperparameter, bandwidth,
controls the number of clusters (see appendix A.2). For illustrative purposes, we chose a relatively
small bandwidth parameter to reveal finer-grained structure within each digit class.
We noticed that images with the same digit label naturally grouped together with small “gaps”
separating each cluster (white space in Fig. 5A). We can show that these “gaps” correspond to
regions where the map z 7→fθ(z) defined by the decoder network changes rapidly. To reveal this,
we queried the decoder Jacobian—i.e., the matrix containing gradients of each output dimension
of fθ(z) with respect to z. The Frobenius norm of this matrix is related to Fisher information
(Berardino et al., 2017) and is a measure of the discriminability of nearby points in the latent space.
We find that values of z with large Jacobians present themselves at cluster boundaries (Fig. 5D),
effectively highlighting the valleys of the 2D aggregate posterior in Fig. 5B. In Appendix C, we
visualize latent space traversals confirming rapid changes in the decoded image. This visualization
highlights a unique feature of QLVMs that is absent in methods like UMAP (which don’t contain a
generative process) as well as alternative generative models with higher-dimensional latent spaces
(where “gaps” cannot be easily identified or visualized).
We then applied clustering in the QLVM space to an acoustic library of Mongolian gerbil vocaliza-
tions from Peterson et al. (2024). The number of vocal call types and the transition statistics between
these calls is an open scientific question, making this dataset a more realistic and challenging testbed.
We repeated the same set of analyses and visualizations as above. Embedded vocalizations segre-
gated according to their mean frequency with visible “gaps” between putative clusters (Fig. 5E).
The mean-shift algorithm identified a number of prototypical vocal call types (Fig. 5F-G), and (as
in MNIST) the norm of the decoder’s Jacobian was sharply peaked at the gaps between clusters
(Fig. 5H), which corresponded to rapid changes in the decoded vocalization (appendix C). While
further investigation is needed, these results suggest that the gerbil vocal repertoire can be coarsely
categorized into low, middle, and high-frequency calls and that many of the finer-scale clusters (in
Fig. 5G) roughly lie along a spectrum. Indeed, many of the fine-scale clusters are not separated by a
clear boundary defined by the decoder’s Jacobian (Fig. 5H) and it is possible to smoothly interpolate
between many, though not all, of the fine-scale vocal clusters (Figs. A4 and A5).
3.4
USING QLVMS TO VISUALIZE CONTINUOUS LATENT DIMENSIONS
We explicitly constrain our latent space in these models to be low-dimensional. However, there
are cases where the true latent dimensionality is higher than that of our model. One such case
is captured by the 3dShapes dataset (Burgess & Kim, 2018), in which high-contrast images are
generated from 6 latent factors (wall hue, floor hue, object hue, object shape, object scale, and
orientation). Importantly, this dataset is constructed to have minimal clustering—each latent factor,
other than shape, is varied continuously. See Fig. A1 for example images from the dataset.
We trained a 2d QLVM on these data and compared the embedding to a 2d UMAP embedding
(Fig. 6). UMAP artificially created small clusters of data, which are not representative of the true
nature of the latent factors. QLVMs, on the other hand, represented each latent feature as a contin-
uum across the latent space. Additionally, UMAP was able to separate one latent factor (floor hue)
into unique clusters, but mixed all other latent factors beyond that. QLVMs smoothly encoded three
of the six latent factors (wall hue, floor hue, object hue), which are responsible for the majority of
variance in pixel space across images. The remaining three latent variables (shape type, scale, and
orientation) were embedded in an increasingly non-smooth manner. Importantly and in contrast to
the experiments in §3.3, the QLVM embedding showed little evidence of clustering—the aggregate
posterior was uniform and the decoder Jacobian showed no sharp ridges across the latent space (see
2Note that the relatively uniform spread of the points across the latent space and periodic boundary condi-
tions in Fig. 5 are expected due to the uniform prior and our construction of a periodic decoder (see §2.2).
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Floor hue
Object hue
Shape
Wall hue
Scale
Orientation
QLVM
UMAP
Figure 6: Embeddings of the 6d 3dShapes dataset into 2 dimensions by a QLVM (top row) and
UMAP (bottom row). For the QLVM, color indicates the maximum probability latent factor value
at that point in the space. Wall, floor, and object hues are matched to the ground truth hue. Cube,
cylinder, sphere, and pill are shown as blue, orange, green, and red under shape. Scale and orienta-
tion range from [0, 1] and [−30, 30] and corresponding colors range from dark blue to yellow.
appendix D). Together, these results demonstrate how QLVMs can nonlinearly pack additional in-
formation into a very low-dimensional space and highlight an advantage over UMAP, which is prone
to hallucinate clusters (which has been previously noted by Zhai et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021).
4
DISCUSSION
We introduced quasi-Monte Carlo latent variable models, or QLVMs—a simple but effective ap-
proach to achieve very low-dimensional embeddings based on a deep generative model. While these
models struggle to capture finescale details in complex datasets (e.g. high-resolution images), they
are an attractive option for practitioners who prioritize interpretability over sample quality. We view
QLVMs as a strong alternative to popular methods like UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018), tSNE (Van
Der Maaten, 2009), and ISOMAP (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), which are popular for learning 2d or 3d
embeddings, but do not learn an explicit data generating process.
Because they can be directly visualized, QLVM embeddings are amenable to a variety of transpar-
ent manipulations and post hoc analyses such as clustering (§3.3), calculating geodesic paths (ap-
pendix C; Arvanitidis et al. 2018), and visualizing smoothness of the decoder mapping (Fig. 5D,H).
One can easily imagine additional applications, such as estimating mutual information or penalizing
the Lipschitz constant of the decoder network during training (see e.g. Kinoshita et al., 2023). All
of these analyses quickly become nontrivial as additional latent dimensions are considered.
4.1
OTHER RELATED WORK
We focused on standard VAEs and IWAEs as competitors to QLVMs. Although these are the most
well-established models, there is a broader literature on this subject including work that explores se-
quential and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (Salimans et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2017; Huang
et al., 2018; Thin et al., 2021), iterative refinements of the variational distribution output by the en-
coder network (Kim et al., 2018; Marino et al., 2018; Emami et al., 2021), and leveraging ensembles
of models for improved importance sampling (Kviman et al., 2022). In general, these methods come
with nontrivial hyperparameter choices such as the number of MCMC steps, stochastic transition
kernels, and annealing schedules. Moreover, they often incur additional computational costs—for
example, by fitting ensembles of encoder networks (in Kviman et al., 2022) or by introducing and
optimizing backward Markov kernels (e.g. Salimans et al., 2015). It is noteworthy that Thin et al.
(2021) motivate this general line of work by stating that IWAEs scale poorly to high-dimensional la-
tent spaces, which is in direct contrast to our goal to identify very low-dimensional representations.
In appendix F, we show a direct comparison between QLVMs and iterative amortized inference
Marino et al. (2018) on 2D MNIST embeddings, confirming that the latter is considerably more
time intensive to train and performs similarly to the IWAE baseline shown in the results section.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4.2
LIMITATIONS
Sample quality. Deep latent variable models are leveraged for a variety of applications in science
and engineering. In certain settings, such as image or audio synthesis, the primary goal is to generate
high-resolution, high-quality, and diverse samples. In these cases, state-of-the-art methods make use
of high-dimensional and hierarchically structured latent variables (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Rombach
et al., 2022). As noted in section 2, the quasi-Monte Carlo approximation employed by QLVMs does
not scale well to high-dimensional spaces. Thus, our work has limited utility to practitioners who
are willing to sacrifice interpretability for state-of-the-art performance and sample quality. However,
QLVMs are appealing in applications where interpretability is prioritized.
Scaling to high-dimensional latent spaces. QLVM performance is driven by densely sampling the
latent space with a discrete lattice of m points. Increasing m improves performance, but can be
computationally costly. Fortunately, in low-dimensional spaces, these costs are not nearly as bad
as one might imagine (see Fig. 4). In principle, IWAE models with expressive and well-trained
encoders could approximate the marginal log likelihood with a smaller number of latent samples
than a QLVM. However, this can be difficult to achieve in practice as seen both in previous work
(Rainforth et al., 2018) and in our results in Fig. 4. Furthermore, as discussed in section 2.3, IWAEs
suffer several computational drawbacks that are overcome by QLVMs. The main computational
limitation of QLVMs is their ability to scale to high-dimensional latent spaces—due to the curse of
dimensionality, the number of latent samples must increase exponentially with the latent dimension
to maintain a similar density of sample points.
Interpretability of low-dimensional latent spaces. While very low-dimensional embeddings have
advantages, they must also be interpreted with care. For example, the 3dshapes dataset contains 6
“ground truth” features. These features must somehow be mixed together when we fit a 2D QLVM.
Indeed, we find that these six factors follow smooth nonlinear profiles over the embedding space,
as shown in Fig. 6. The embedding is clearly organized with respect to three of the six features
(wall hue, floor hue, and object hue) but the patterns with respect to the remaining three features are
not easy to visualize. Of course, it is impossible to linearly disentangle more than two features in
a 2-dimensional latent space, so these limitations are not unique to QLVMs. Nonetheless, this is a
broader limitation of visualization techniques that future research may wish to address.
Identifiability. The optimal embedding identified by deep latent variable models is generally not
unique (Hyv¨arinen & Pajunen, 1999) unless further assumptions are introduced (Khemakhem et al.,
2020). In their simplest form, QLVMs do not address this concern. Future work should investigate
the extent to which this non-uniqueness impacts post-hoc analyses such as clustering.
4.3
POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS
One can imagine many refinements to the approach we’ve outlined in this paper. First, it would
be interesting to explore whether some of the ideas discussed in §4.1 related to Monte Carlo might
be incorporated to refine the QLVM objective. For example, one could use a lattice to initialize an
adaptive importance sampling routine (Bugallo et al., 2017). Such improvements could enable the
model to utilize the latent space at a finer scale than is specified by a fixed lattice, thereby improving
the quality of generated samples and addressing a key limitation.
Another extension would be to incorporate additional domain knowledge as conditional variables
that modulate the latent space—a principle that is already well-established in the broader literature
(Sohn et al., 2015). In many applications, we expect this to aid model interpretability as well as
expressivity. For example, similar body movements can be executed at faster or slower speeds; this
motivated Wu et al. (2025) to use conditional VAEs to disentangle speed from unsupervised latent
dimensions (see also Costacurta et al., 2022). Similarly, in acoustic datasets (e.g. in Fig. 5E-H), it
would make sense to condition on features such as syllable duration, volume, and estimates of the
fundamental frequency. We expect that providing the decoder with these statistics would also im-
prove the quality of QLVM reconstructions, while preserving the interpretability of the embedding.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Charu C Aggarwal, Alexander Hinneburg, and Daniel A Keim. On the surprising behavior of dis-
tance metrics in high dimensional space. In International conference on database theory, pp.
420–434. Springer, 2001.
Charly Andral.
Combining normalizing flows and quasi-Monte Carlo.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.05934, 2024.
Georgios Arvanitidis, Lars Kai Hansen, and Søren Hauberg. Latent space oddity: on the curvature
of deep generative models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJzRZ-WCZ.
Maxime Beau, David J Herzfeld, Francisco Naveros, Marie E Hemelt, Federico D’Agostino, Marlies
Oostland, Alvaro S´anchez-L´opez, Young Yoon Chung, Michael Maibach, Stephen Kyranakis,
et al. A deep learning strategy to identify cell types across species from high-density extracellular
recordings. Cell, 188(8):2218–2234, 2025.
Alexander Berardino, Valero Laparra, Johannes Ball´e, and Eero Simoncelli. Eigen-distortions of
hierarchical representations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Simon Breneis and Aicke Hinrichs.
Fibonacci lattices have minimal dispersion on the two-
dimensional torus, pp. 117–132.
De Gruyter, Berlin, Boston, 2020.
ISBN 9783110652581.
doi: doi:10.1515/9783110652581-006.
Alexander Buchholz, Florian Wenzel, and Stephan Mandt. Quasi-Monte Carlo variational inference.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 668–677. PMLR, 2018.
Monica F Bugallo, Victor Elvira, Luca Martino, David Luengo, Joaquin Miguez, and Petar M Djuric.
Adaptive importance sampling: The past, the present, and the future. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, 34(4):60–79, 2017.
Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders. In 4th
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
Chris Burgess and Hyunjik Kim. 3D shapes dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/3dshapes-dataset/,
2018.
Yizong Cheng. Mean shift, mode seeking, and clustering. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, 17(8):790–799, 1995.
Julia Costacurta, Lea Duncker, Blue Sheffer, Winthrop Gillis, Caleb Weinreb, Jeffrey Markowitz,
Sandeep R Datta, Alex Williams, and Scott Linderman. Distinguishing discrete and continu-
ous behavioral variability using warped autoregressive hmms. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 35:23838–23850, 2022.
Bin Dai, Ziyu Wang, and David Wipf. The usual suspects? Reassessing blame for VAE posterior col-
lapse. In Hal Daum´e III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2313–
2322. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/dai20c.html.
Josef Dick, Peter Kritzer, and Friedrich Pillichshammer. Lattice rules. Springer series in compu-
tational mathematics. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 2022 edition, July
2022.
Jiarui Ding, Anne Condon, and Sohrab P Shah. Interpretable dimensionality reduction of single cell
transcriptome data with deep generative models. Nature communications, 9(1):2002, 2018.
Carl Doersch. Tutorial on variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05908, 2016.
Patrick Emami, Pan He, Sanjay Ranka, and Anand Rangarajan. Efficient iterative amortized in-
ference for learning symmetric and disentangled multi-object representations. In International
conference on machine learning, pp. 2970–2981. PMLR, 2021.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jack Goffinet, Samuel Brudner, Richard Mooney, and John Pearson.
Low-dimensional learned
feature spaces quantify individual and group differences in vocal repertoires. Elife, 10:e67855,
2021.
Anirudh Goyal, Nan Rosemary Ke, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua Bengio.
Variational walk-
back:
Learning a transition operator as a stochastic recurrent net.
In I. Guyon,
U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2017/file/
46a558d97954d0692411c861cf78ef79-Paper.pdf.
Christopher Heje Grønbech, Maximillian Fornitz Vording, Pascal N Timshel, Casper Kaae
Sønderby, Tune H Pers, and Ole Winther. scVAE: variational auto-encoders for single-cell gene
expression data. Bioinformatics, 36(16):4415–4422, 2020.
Hamid Hadipour, Chengyou Liu, Rebecca Davis, Silvia T Cardona, and Pingzhao Hu. Deep cluster-
ing of small molecules at large-scale via variational autoencoder embedding and K-means. BMC
bioinformatics, 23(Suppl 4):132, 2022.
Junxian He, Daniel Spokoyny, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Lagging inference
networks and posterior collapse in variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05534,
2019.
Chin-Wei Huang, Shawn Tan, Alexandre Lacoste, and Aaron C Courville. Improving explorability
in variational inference with annealed variational objectives. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 31, 2018.
Aapo Hyv¨arinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence and
uniqueness results. Neural networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoen-
coders and nonlinear ICA: A unifying framework. In International conference on artificial intel-
ligence and statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Yoon Kim, Sam Wiseman, Andrew Miller, David Sontag, and Alexander Rush. Semi-amortized
variational autoencoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2678–2687.
PMLR, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Diederik P Kingma, Max Welling, et al. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations
and Trends® in Machine Learning, 12(4):307–392, 2019.
Yuri Kinoshita, Kenta Oono, Kenji Fukumizu, Yuichi Yoshida, and Shin-Ichi Maeda.
Control-
ling posterior collapse by an inverse Lipschitz constraint on the decoder network. In Andreas
Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scar-
lett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 17041–17060. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/kinoshita23a.html.
Sai Koukuntla, Tate DeWeese, Alexandra Cheng, Robyn Mildren, Aamna Lawrence, Austin R.
Graves, Jennifer Colonell, Timothy D. Harris, and Adam S. Charles. SLAy-ing oversplitting
errors in high-density electrophysiology spike sorting.
bioRxiv, 2025.
doi: 10.1101/2025.
06.20.660590. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2025/06/25/2025.06.20.
660590.
Oskar Kviman, Harald Melin, Hazal Koptagel, Victor Elvira, and Jens Lagergren. Multiple impor-
tance sampling ELBO and deep ensembles of variational approximations. In Gustau Camps-Valls,
Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.), Proceedings of The 25th International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pp. 10687–10702. PMLR, 28–30 Mar 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v151/kviman22a.html.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. MNIST handwritten digit database. ATT Labs [On-
line]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.
Gunther Leobacher and Friedrich Pillichshammer. Introduction to quasi-Monte Carlo integration
and applications. Springer, 2014.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Kevin Luxem, Petra Mocellin, Falko Fuhrmann, Johannes K¨ursch, Stephanie R Miller, Jorge J Palop,
Stefan Remy, and Pavol Bauer. Identifying behavioral structure from deep variational embeddings
of animal motion. Communications Biology, 5(1):1267, 2022.
Pierre L’Ecuyer. Randomized quasi-Monte Carlo: An introduction for practitioners. In International
Conference on Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods in Scientific Computing, pp. 29–52.
Springer, 2016.
Kien Mai Ngoc and Myunggwon Hwang. Finding the best k for the dimension of the latent space
in autoencoders. In Computational Collective Intelligence: 12th International Conference, IC-
CCI 2020, Da Nang, Vietnam, November 30–December 3, 2020, Proceedings 12, pp. 453–464.
Springer, 2020.
Joe Marino, Yisong Yue, and Stephan Mandt. Iterative amortized inference. In Jennifer Dy and
Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3403–3412. PMLR, 10–15 Jul
2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/marino18a.html.
Pierre-Alexandre Mattei and Jes Frellsen.
Leveraging the exact likelihood of deep latent vari-
able models.
In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2018/file/
0609154fa35b3194026346c9cac2a248-Paper.pdf.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and
projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Warren Morningstar, Sharad Vikram, Cusuh Ham, Andrew Gallagher, and Joshua Dillon. Automatic
differentiation variational inference with mixtures. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu
(eds.), Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3250–3258. PMLR, 13–15 Apr
2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/morningstar21b.html.
Sebastian Nowozin. Debiasing evidence approximations: On importance-weighted autoencoders
and jackknife variational inference.
In International conference on learning representations,
2018.
Art B. Owen. Monte Carlo theory, methods and examples. https://artowen.su.domains/mc/,
2013.
Art B. Owen.
Practical Quasi-Monte Carlo Integration.
https://artowen.su.domains/mc/
practicalqmc.pdf, 2023.
Chethan Pandarinath, Daniel J O’Shea, Jasmine Collins, Rafal Jozefowicz, Sergey D Stavisky,
Jonathan C Kao, Eric M Trautmann, Matthew T Kaufman, Stephen I Ryu, Leigh R Hochberg,
et al. Inferring single-trial neural population dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. Nature
methods, 15(10):805–815, 2018.
Ralph E Peterson, Aman Choudhri, Catalin Mitelut, Aramis Tanelus, Athena Capo-Battaglia, Alex H
Williams, David M Schneider, and Dan H Sanes. Unsupervised discovery of family specific vocal
usage in the mongolian gerbil. Elife, 12:RP89892, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Tom Rainforth, Adam Kosiorek, Tuan Anh Le, Chris Maddison, Maximilian Igl, Frank Wood, and
Yee Whye Teh. Tighter variational bounds are not necessarily better. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas
Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4277–4285. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/rainforth18b.html.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Diederik Kingma, and Max Welling. Markov chain monte carlo and variational
inference: Bridging the gap. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1218–1226.
PMLR, 2015.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Łukasz Struski, Marcin Mazur, Paweł Batorski, Przemysław Spurek, and Jacek Tabor. Bounding
evidence and estimating log-likelihood in VAE. In Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem
van de Meent (eds.), Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Statistics, volume 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5036–5051.
PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/struski23a.html.
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Vin de Silva, and John C. Langford. A global geometric framework for non-
linear dimensionality reduction. Science, 290(5500):2319–2323, 2000. doi: 10.1126/science.290.
5500.2319. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.290.5500.2319.
Achille Thin, Nikita Kotelevskii, Arnaud Doucet, Alain Durmus, Eric Moulines, and Maxim Panov.
Monte Carlo variational auto-encoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
10247–10257. PMLR, 2021.
George Tucker, Dieterich Lawson, Shixiang Gu, and Chris J Maddison. Doubly reparameterized
gradient estimators for Monte Carlo objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04152, 2018.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. NVAE: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.
Laurens Van Der Maaten. Learning a parametric embedding by preserving local structure. In Artifi-
cial intelligence and statistics, pp. 384–391. PMLR, 2009.
Yingfan Wang, Haiyang Huang, Cynthia Rudin, and Yaron Shaposhnik. Understanding how dimen-
sion reduction tools work: an empirical approach to deciphering t-SNE, UMAP, TriMAP, and
PaCMAP for data visualization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(201):1–73, 2021.
Larry Wasserman. Topological data analysis. Annual review of statistics and its application, 5
(2018):501–532, 2018.
Joshua Huang Wu, Hari Koneru, James Russell Ravenel, Anshuman Sabath, James Michael Roach,
Shaun Sze-Xian Lim, Michael R Tadross, Alex H Williams, and Timothy W Dunn. Disentangling
3D animal pose dynamics with scrubbed conditional latent variables. In The Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=i7drKWhFCo.
Jiaqian Yan, Ming Ma, and Zhenhua Yu. bmVAE: a variational autoencoder method for clustering
single-cell mutation data. Bioinformatics, 39(1):btac790, 12 2022. ISSN 1367-4811. doi: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/btac790. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac790.
Zhiqian Zhai, Yu L Lei, Rongrong Wang, and Yuying Xie. Supervised capacity preserving mapping:
a clustering guided visualization method for scrna-seq data. Bioinformatics, 38(9):2496–2503,
03 2022. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac131. URL https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btac131.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
ADDITIONAL MATHEMATICAL DETAILS
A.1
LATTICES
Throughout, a randomly shifted lattice is defined modulo 1. That is, if u1, . . . um define a d-
dimensional lattice, we set ezj = uj + ∆−⌊uj + ∆⌋where ∆∼Unif([0, 1]d) is a random
shift and ⌊·⌋denotes the flooring operation.
A lattice is a set of points L ⊂Rd, d ≥1 that
1. is closed under addition and subtraction (x, y ∈L =⇒x + y ∈L, x −y ∈L), and
2. contains no repeat points (∀x, y ∈L, x ̸= y, ∃ϵ > 0 such that ∥x −y∥> ϵ)
A lattice rule is a lattice L constrained to the unit hypercube. In this work we use rank-1 lattice
rules, which are lattice rules such that uj = jb
m , b ∈Zd — in particular, we use Korobov lattice
rules, in which b = [1, a, a2 −⌊a2
m ⌋, . . . , ad−1 −⌊ad−1
m ⌋], a ∈{2, 3, . . . , m −1}. The Fibonacci
lattice is a special case of Korobov lattices in which d = 2, a = Fib(k −1), m = Fib(k), where
Fib(k) is the k-th element of the Fibonacci sequence. As Fibonacci lattice rules have been shown to
optimally reduce integration error over the unit square, we use those for all two-dimensional latent
spaces; we use more general Korobov lattice rules for three-dimensional latent spaces. See Dick
et al. (2022); Owen (2023) for further details regarding lattice rules.
A.2
MEAN-SHIFT CLUSTERING
The mean-shift algorithm is a mode clustering method defines clusters based on modes of density of
the data. This algorithm begins with a set of seed points and finds modes by iteratively moving these
seed points towards areas of high density in local neighborhoods, defined by a bandwidth parameter
h > 0. Starting from z(0), updates are defined as:
z(j+1) =
P
i ziK

||zi−z(j)||
h

P
i K

||zi−z(j)||
h

(8)
where K(·) is a smoothing kernel; in our experiments we set K(u) = exp(−u2). Given that our
QLVM gives us a density estimate, we can replace points zi with our lattice points, ˜zi, and density
estimates with our aggregate density Ex[p(z|x)]. In a neighborhood Nh around our current mode
estimate:
z(j+1) =
P
˜zi∈Nh ˜ziEx[p(˜zi|x)]
P
˜zi∈Nh Ex[p(˜zi|x)]
(9)
Upon convergence of all initial seeds to local modes, seeds within the set bandwidth of each other are
merged, favoring seeds with the highest overall density. See (Wasserman, 2018) for further details.
B
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
All models were trained to convergence using Adam with learning rate=0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999. MNIST and gerbil vocalizations were trained using Bernoulli log probability over pixels,
all other datasets were trained using Gaussian log probability with variance= 0.1. For VAEs and
IWAEs, variational posteriors were Gaussian distributions, latent priors were standard Gaussian
distributions. QLVM training took between 30 minutes (MNIST) and 9 hours (3dShapes) on one
NVIDIA H100 GPU. For all IWAEs we used m = 10 importance samples.
B.1
DATASETS
B.1.1
MNIST, Celeb-A, AND 3dShapes
For both MNIST (LeCun et al., 2010) and Celeb-A (Liu et al., 2015) we used default train/test splits.
Celeb-A images were downsized to 80x80 pixels and converted to grayscale. For 3dShapes (Burgess
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A1: Example samples from the 3dShapes dataset. Numbers indicate latent factor values.
From top to bottom: Floor hue, wall hue, object hue, scale, object shape, orientation.
& Kim, 2018), models were trained using an 80/20 train/test split. See Fig. A1 for examples of the
3dShapes data.
B.1.2
ZEBRA FINCH AND GERBIL VOCALIZATIONS
We used vocalizations from a single adult zebra finch, Blu285 (Goffinet et al., 2021), and vocaliza-
tions from three different families of gerbils (Peterson et al., 2024). Vocalizations were segmented
and processed into spectrograms using Autoencoded Vocal Analysis (Goffinet et al., 2021). Models
on both datasets were trained using an 80/20 train/test split.
B.1.3
CMU MOTION CAPTURE
We used motion capture data from the Carnegie Mellon University Motion Capture dataset (https:
//mocap.cs.cmu.edu/) — specifically, subject 54 (human pantomiming animal behaviors). Each
trial consists of a sequence of poses; for each of the 44 non-torso joints in the pose we extract the sine
and cosine of its Euler angle. We perform the same transformation to 3 global (torso) pose angles,
and from these compute global (torso) translational velocities. Each data point fed to the model was
a stack of 10 contiguous transformed frames; models were trained using an 80/20 train/test split.
B.2
ARCHITECTURES
See Fig. A2 for all decoder architectures used for all experiments. VAE and IWAE encoders had
the same structure as decoders in the reverse order, with ReLU nonlinearities replaced by hyperbolic
tangent nonlinearities for stability during training.
B.3
PERFORMANCE BY NUMBER OF SAMPLES IN QLVMS AND IWAES
To compare the computational cost (vs. model performance) in IWAEs and QLVMs, we trained each
model on MNIST, Celeb-A, and the zebra finch dataset, varying the number of importance samples
k in IWAEs and number of lattice points m for QLVMs. For IWAEs, we used:
• MNIST, k ∈[5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 85, 140, 225]
• Celeb-A, k ∈[5, 10, 15, 20]
• zebra finch, k ∈[5, 10, 15, 30, 60, 70, 80]
For QLVMs, we used:
• MNIST, m ∈[55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987, 1597, 2584, 4181, 6765, 10946, 17711, 28657, 46368]
• Celeb-A, m ∈[55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987]
• zebra finch, m ∈[55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987]
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Upsample cell
Layer Norm
ConvTranspose
(3x3)
Layer Norm
ConvTranspose
(3x3)
Residual cell
Layer Norm
Conv(1x1)
Layer Norm-Swish
Depthwise-sep. 
Conv (5x5)
Layer Norm-Swish
Conv(1x1)
Layer Norm
Squeeze &
Excitation
MNIST
Linear (d,500)
Linear (500,784)
Sigmoid
Celeb-A
2x ConvTranspose
(3x3)
Linear (d,2048)
Linear (2048,1600)
Res Cell
x4}
3x Res Cell 
Sigmoid
ConvTranspose
(3x3)
3dShapes
Linear (d,2048)
Linear (2048,2048)
Linear (2048,512)
4x Upsample Cell 
3x Res Cell 
Sigmoid
Gerbil
Linear (d,64)
Linear (64,256)
Linear (256,1024)
Linear (1024,8192)
4x Upsample Cell 
Layer Norm
Conv(3x3)
Sigmoid
Zebra ﬁnch
Linear (d,2048)
Linear (2048,4096)
4x ConvTranspose 
(3x3)
Sigmoid
CMU Mocap
Linear (d,500)
Linear (500,1000)
A
B
Figure A2: (A) Neural network cells used in models. (B) Model decoders used in all experiments.
All linear and convolutional layers prior to the sigmoid output were followed by a ReLU nonlinearity.
Architectures were the same as those used in all other experiments; we trained three models for each
value of m and k.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
LATENT TRAVERSALS AND GEODESICS
Because of the low dimensionality of our latent space, we can perform linear latent traversals (as
typically carried out to explore dimensions of LVMs) or find geodesics based on the aggregate
density over the data. Additionally, since our latent space is constrained to the unit d-cube, we can
traverse over all values of each latent variable. We do so in Fig. A3 for each dataset. In each, we
see that, for the most part, moving smoothly through latent space results in smooth changes to the
output images. Abrupt changes occur at what appear to be class boundaries.
We can probe these regions of what seem to be abrupt change based either on reconstructions or
on the aggregate posterior. We demonstrate one such case on the gerbil vocal dataset in Fig. A4.
Traveling parallel to what appears to a region of low density results in little change in the output,
while there is an abrupt change in the output spectrogram the moment that boundary is crossed.
Finally, we can compute geodesics connecting points in the latent space (Arvanitidis et al., 2018).
Specifically, we construct a weighted graph over this lattice by considering any point to be connected
to its close neighbors on the lattice, with weight determined by the aggregate posterior density ratio
of that point to its neighbor.3 This assigns a high cost to moving from a point with high density to a
point with very low density, while prioritizing moving towards points with highest density. We then
use Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the shortest path on this graph between two query points. The output
of this procedure is visualized in Fig. A5, along with reconstructions from the geodesic.
Figure A3: Traversals over the entire latent space for all datasets. Due to the constraints on our
latent space (periodicity on the unit d-cube, 2-dimensional) we are able to fully explore the latent
space for each model.
3Note that the density ratio defines one choice of a local metric, but others are also possible such as the pull
back metric defined by the Fisher information matrix (Arvanitidis et al., 2018). We plan to pursue and compare
these possibilities in future work.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A4: Latent traversal for the gerbil vocalization dataset. The top row is a traversal roughly
parallel to what seems to be a class boundary; the bottom row crosses this boundary. The red dot
and outlined red spectrogram correspond to the point at which this traversal crosses this boundary.
This crossing is accompanied by a sharp change in the reconstruction.
11
15
Figure A5: Geodesic from centroid 11 to centroid 15 (in Fig. 5B), and corresponding reconstructions
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D
3dShapes POSTERIORS AND JACOBIANS
Here, we visualize the aggregated posterior and squared Frobenius norm of the Jacobian for the
3dShapes dataset analyzed in §3.4. The motivation for these analyses are described in §3.3, where
they are demonstrated on MNIST and a dataset of gerbil vocalizations. Unlike in those datasets, we
see no evidence of clustering—i.e. no peaks in the aggregated posterior or ridges in the scale of the
Jacobian—in the QLVM embedding of the 3dShapes dataset. Instead, we see a roughly uniform
density over the entire latent space, reflecting the continuous nature of the generating latent factors
for this dataset (Fig. A6).
Figure A6: Aggregated posterior (left) and smoothed Frobenius norm of the decoder Jacobian
(right). Unlike in MNIST and the gerbil vocal dataset, there is no visible clustering.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
E
MODEL ALTERATIONS
E.1
MC,QMC,AND RQMC TRAINING
The bound of eq. (5) holds for any set of Monte Carlo samples — how important is the RQMC
sampling scheme that we used? We trained networks with the same architecture and same number
of latent samples per data point on MNIST using uniform MC samples and a fixed QMC lattice,
finding that the RQMC sampling scheme that we used in the main text yielded small, but consistent
improvements in performance. We hypothesize that this is because of the structure of the lattice
combined with the uniform random shift; the uniform tiling of the latent space forces the model to
explore the entire latent space every batch, while the shift ensures that the gaps in the latent space
left by the lattice are explored across batches.
Figure A7: Comparison between model performance on MNIST test set using MC samples, a fixed
QMC lattice, or RQMC (as in main text) for training. 10 models were trained per condition, RQMC
consistently displays best performance.
E.2
ALTERNATIVE LATENT SPACES
While lattices perform best when used for integration over periodic functions (see Owen, 2023,
Chapter 16, section 7) , it may be the case that a flexible neural network decoder does not require
periodicity (or can learn it implicitly) in order to learn a good representation for data. We demon-
strate in Fig. A8 that this is not the case; rather, it impairs model performance (in terms of log
evidence). As such, it appears that both enforcing periodicity is helpful for learning a good decoder.
Alternatively, rather than using a flat torus basis, we could use a Gaussian inverse CDF basis to
effectively have a Gaussian prior over the latent space, while still relatively constraining the domain
of the model. In Fig. A9, we compare performance of this basis to the QLVMs trained throughout the
rest of the paper. This version performs similarly (but slightly worse) than QLVMs with a uniform
prior and periodic boundary conditions on the latent space. We chalk up this minor difference to the
fact that the Fibonacci lattice rule is not optimized for the Gaussian case. Regardless, the QLVM
with a Gaussian prior outperforms VAE and IWAE models with the same prior.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A8: Comparison between model performance on MNIST test set using a non-periodic decoder,
or a standard QLVM (as in the main text). 10 models were trained per condition. The standard
QLVM consistently displays best performance.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A9: (A) Comparison between QLVMs trained using the default uniform prior, a Gaussian
prior, 2D IWAEs, and 2D VAEs. In each case, both QLVMs outperform IWAEs and VAEs, with
Gaussian QLVMs slightly underperforming uniform QLVMs. (B) Latent embeddings of MNIST the
uniform QLVM and Gaussian QLVM.
F
COMPARISON TO ITERATIVE AMORTIZED INFERENCE
An alternative approach to improving the performance of VAEs is to iteratively refine the varia-
tional distribution output by the encoder network, as proposed by Marino et al. (2018). While this
strategy was shown to be effective for the higher-dimensional models, we demonstrate that it still
underperforms 2D QLVMs (Fig. A10).
Figure A10: Performance vs. computational cost curves for 2D QLVMs (red), VAEs (green), IWAEs
(purple), and iterative amortized inference-trained VAEs (orange) on MNIST. Curves closer to the
lower left quadrant of each plot indicate a more favorable tradeoff.
G
COMPARISON TO HIGHER-DIMENSIONAL VAES
We additionally compared 2D QLVMs to VAEs and IWAEs of higher dimensions.
Higher-
dimensional IWAEs and VAEs outperformed 2D QLVMs quantitatively (Fig. A11); however,
QLVMs qualitatively had similar reconstructions to up to 8D VAEs (Fig. A12). On simpler datasets,
the improvements of higher-dimensional VAEs are relatively minor. However, samples from the
QLVM prior both show higher sample quality and diversity than low-dimensional VAEs, and their
samples more accurately reflect data than higher-dimensional VAEs (Fig. A13).
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A11: Bounds on marginal log likelihood on heldout test data for QLVMs, VAEs, and IWAEs
of the same and larger dimensions; orange bars are 2D, gray bars are higher dimensional. Error bars
indicate 1 standard deviation across five random seeds.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A12: Reconstructions from models from Fig. A11; 2D QLVM reconstructions are compara-
ble with up to 8D VAEs.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure A13: Samples from the prior for QLVMs and VAEs from Fig. A11; samples from QLVM
prior resemble data more closely than samples from VAE priors.
26