--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
GENERATIVE BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION:
GENERATIVE MODELS AS ACQUISITION FUNCTIONS
Rafael Oliveira, Daniel M. Steinberg & Edwin V. Bonilla
CSIRO, Sydney, Australia
{rafael.dossantosdeoliveira, dan.steinberg, edwin.bonilla}@csiro.au
ABSTRACT
We present a general strategy for turning generative models into candidate solu-
tion samplers for batch Bayesian optimization (BO). The use of generative models
for BO enables large batch scaling as generative sampling, optimization of non-
continuous design spaces, and high-dimensional and combinatorial design. In-
spired by the success of direct preference optimization (DPO), we show that one
can train a generative model with noisy, simple utility values directly computed
from observations to then form proposal distributions whose densities are propor-
tional to the expected utility, i.e., BO’s acquisition function values. Furthermore,
this approach is generalizable beyond preference-based feedback to general types
of reward signals and loss functions. This perspective avoids the construction
of surrogate (regression or classification) models, common in previous methods
that have used generative models for black-box optimization. Theoretically, we
show that the generative models within the BO process follow a sequence of dis-
tributions which asymptotically approximate an optimal target under certain con-
ditions. We also evaluate the performance through experiments on challenging
optimization problems involving large batches in high dimensions.
1
INTRODUCTION
Bayesian optimization (BO) has been a successful approach to solve complex black-box optimiza-
tion problems by making use of probabilistic surrogate models, such as a Gaussian processes (GPs)
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), and their uncertainty estimates (Shahriari et al., 2016; Garnett,
2023). BO methods have been particularly useful in areas such as hyper-parameter tuning for ma-
chine learning algorithms (Snoek et al., 2012), material design (Frazier & Wang, 2016), and robot
locomotion (Calandra et al., 2016). The core idea of BO is to apply a Bayesian decision-theoretic
framework to make optimal choices by maximizing an expected utility criterion, also known as an
acquisition function. The corresponding expectations are taken under a Bayesian posterior over the
underlying objective function. Thus, the Bayesian model provides a principled way to account for
the uncertainty inherent to the limited amount of data and the noisy observations.
In many applications such as simulated scenarios (Azimi et al., 2010), one is able to run multiple
evaluations of the objective function in parallel, even though the simulations themselves might be
expensive to run. Common BO approaches to these batch settings incrementally build a set of can-
didates by sampling “fantasy” observations from the probabilistic model and conditioning on them
before selecting the next candidate in the batch (Wilson et al., 2018). Although near-optimal batches
can be selected this way, this approach is not scalable to very large batches in high-dimensional
spaces, such as problems in protein design (Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023).
One of the most promising alternatives to batch BO has been to train a generative model as a proposal
distribution informed by the acquisition function and then sample a batch from the learned proposal
(Brookes et al., 2019; Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023; Steinberg et al., 2025). This approach
comes with several advantages. Firstly, given a trained generative model, sampling is usually inex-
pensive. Secondly, existing general-purpose generative models can be used and fine-tuned for the
optimization task at hand. Lastly, sampling avoids estimating the global optimum of an acquisition
function, which can be hard. However, existing generative approaches to black-box optimization
usually rely on fitting a surrogate (regression or classification) model first then training a generative
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
model on top of it (Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023; Steinberg et al., 2025). This two-stage
process compounds approximation errors from both models and can increase the computational cost
significantly when compared to having a single model.
In this paper we present a general framework for learning generative models for batch Bayesian
optimization tasks that requires a single model without the need for additional probabilistic regres-
sion or classification surrogates. Our approach for generative BO (GenBO) encodes general utility
functions into training objectives for generative models directly. We focus on two cases, one where
we train the model via a loss function for a reward model analogously to the direct preference opti-
mization (DPO) formulation for large language models (Rafailov et al., 2023), and the second one
where we train the generative model through divergence minimization, using utilities as part of sam-
ple weights. We present theoretical analyses on the convergence of approximations and empirical
results on practical applications involving high-dimensional combinatorial optimization problems.
2
BACKGROUND
We consider the problem of estimating the global optimum of an objective function f : X →R as:
x∗∈argmax
x∈X
f(x) ,
(1)
where f is an expensive-to-evaluate black-box function, i.e., ∇xf is unavailable. We can only
observe f(x) via noisy evaluations y = f(x)+ϵ, where ϵ is often assumed to be zero-mean Gaussian
noise, though more general noise models can be handled by the framework we propose. We assume
that the objective f can be evaluated in parallel, and the algorithm is allowed to run up to T ≥1
optimization rounds with a batch of B query locations Bt := {xt,i}B
i=1 ⊂X per round.
BO with regression models.
Typically BO assumes a Bayesian prior over f (Garnett, 2023),
often given by a Gaussian process (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Given a set of observations Dt,
corrupted by Gaussian noise ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
ϵ ), the Bayesian posterior distribution over f given the data
Dt is available in closed form as a GP with known mean and covariance functions (see Appendix A).
BO then uses the model’s posterior distribution to compute an acquisition function at(x) mapping
candidate points x ∈X to their expected utility value E[u(y)|x, Dt], where the utility function u
intuitively encodes how useful it is to collect a new observation at x. Classical examples of expected
utilities include the probability of improvement at(x) := p(y ≥τ|x, Dt) = E[I[y ≥τ]|x, Dt] and
the expected improvement at(x) := E[max{y −τ, 0}|Dt]. The next candidate is then chosen as:
xt+1 ∈argmax
x∈X
at(x) .
(2)
Batch BO.
This strategy can be extended to the batch setting in a variety of ways (Garnett, 2023,
§11.3). For instance, one can select the first batch point xt,1 by maximizing at as above, and then
select the next candidate as xt,2 ∈argmaxx∈X E[u(y)|x, Dt ∪{xt,1, ˜yt,1}], where the expectation
is over both ˜yt,1 ∼p(y|xt,1, Dt) and y ∼p(y|x, Dt ∪{xt,1, ˜yt,1}), and iterate over this process
until B candidates have been selected for parallel evaluation. Although near optimal, evaluating this
conditional expectation becomes quickly intractable as the batch size grows. Hence, one usually
resorts to Monte Carlo approximations (Wilson et al., 2018). Other BO strategies allow for efficient
optimization of the batch in parallel, such as information-theoretic acquisition functions (Takeno
et al., 2020; Teufel et al., 2024), or even asynchronously (Kandasamy et al., 2018). However, scal-
ing up to large batches in high-dimensional domains, especially involving combinatorial or mixed
discrete-continuous search spaces, remains challenging (Gonz´alez-Duque et al., 2024).
Active generation with classification models.
Instead of relying on a Bayesian surrogate model
for f and then computing an acquisition function a on top of it, one can model a directly, which is
the main idea behind likelihood-free BO (Song et al., 2022). On this line, methods like variational
search distributions (VSD, Steinberg et al., 2025) and batch BORE (Oliveira et al., 2022) learn a
probabilistic classifier π(x) ≈p(y ≥τ) in the original space, X, based on improvement labels
z := I[y ≥τ] and then generate batches by approximately sampling B candidates from p(x|y ≥τ).
The classifier can be learned by, e.g., minimizing the cross-entropy loss:
Ln(π) := −
n
X
i=1
zi log π(xi) + (1 −zi) log(1 −π(xi)) .
(3)
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Given a prior p0 over X and the classifier πt that minimizes Lnt over the current nt := tB data
points in Dt, we can now learn a generative model approximating p(x|y ≥τ, Dt) as:
qt ∈argmax
q
Ex∼q[log πt(x)] −DKL(q||p0) ,
(4)
which corresponds to an evidence lower bound treating πt(x) ≈p(y ≥τ|x, Dt) as a likelihood.
Direct preference optimization.
The process above for learning qt can be likened to the typi-
cal fine-tuning of large language models (LLMs) via reinforcement learning with human feedback
(RLHF, Bai et al., 2022), which would normally involve training the LLM as an RL agent with a
reward model ρ. In practice, we do not directly observe rewards, but have access to user preferences.
Given a prompt’s context c, corresponding to the RL state, let x+, x−∼q(x|c) denote two answers
generated by an LLM q, with x+ denoting the answer preferred by the user, and x−the dispre-
ferred one. Having a dataset D+
n := {ci, x+
i , x−
i }n
i=1, one can then learn a reward function ρ by
minimizing the negative log-likelihood under a preference model, such as Bradley & Terry (1952):
L+
n (ρ) := −E(c,x+,x−)∼D+
n [log σ(ρ(c, x+) −ρ(c, x−))] .
(5)
Having learned a reward model ρn, RLHF trains the LLM as to approximate an agent’s optimal
policy under ρn. Regularization based on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence with respect to a
reference model qref is further added to improve stability. The optimal generative model then solves:
qn ∈argmax
q
Ec∼D+
n ,x∼q(x|c)[ρn(c, x)] −ηDKL(q||qref) .
(6)
Direct preference optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al., 2023) removes the need for an explicit reward
model by viewing the LLM itself through the lens of a reward model. It is not hard to show that,
fixing a reward model ρ, the optimal solution to Equation 6 is given by:
q(x|c) =
1
ζρ(c)qref(x|c) exp
1
η ρ(c, x)

,
(7)
where ζρ(c) := P
x qref(x|c) exp(η−1ρ(c, x)) is the partition function at the given context c. Al-
though it is intractable to evaluate ζρ in practice, DPO uses the fact that, in the Bradley-Terry model,
the partition function-dependent terms cancel out. Note that the reward model ρ can be expressed in
terms of the optimal q as:
ρ(c, x) = η log
 q(x|c)
qref(x|c)

+ η log ζρ(c) .
(8)
Applying the substitution above to the preference-based loss (5), we get:
LDPO(q) = −E(c,x+,x−)∼D+
n

log σ

η log
 q(x+|c)
qref(x+|c)

−η log
 q(x−|c)
qref(x−|c)

,
(9)
which eliminates the partition function ζρ terms. Therefore, we can train the generative model q
directly with LDPO without the need for an intermediate reward model. Such simplification to a
single training loop cuts down the need for computational resources, eliminates a source of approx-
imation errors (from learning ρ), and brings in theoretical guarantees from Bradley-Terry models
(Shah et al., 2016; Bong & Rinaldo, 2022). The main question guiding our work is whether we
can apply a similar technique to simplify the training of (arbitrary, not necessarily LLM) generative
models for likelihood-free BO by removing the need for an intermediate surrogate model for f.
3
A GENERAL RECIPE FOR GENERATIVE BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION
As seen in Section 2, using generative models for BO typically involves training a regression or
classification model as an intermediate step to then train the candidate generator. The use of an
intermediate model demands additional computational resources and brings in further sources of
approximation errors which may hinder performance. Hence, we propose a framework to train the
generative model directly from (noisy) observation values. The main idea is to train the model to
approximate a target distribution proportional to BO’s acquisition function and then use the learned
generative model as a proposal for the next query locations. There are different approaches to do so,
some of which have been previously explored in the literature for specific acquisition functions, such
as the probability of improvement (Brookes et al., 2019; Steinberg et al., 2025) and upper confidence
bound (Yun et al., 2025). However, we here focus on a general recipe to turn a generative model
into a density following any acquisition function that can be expressed as an expected utility.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Utility functions.
Consider a likelihood-free BO setting (Song et al., 2022), where we aim to
directly learn an acquisition function at : X →R from available data Dt. If our acquisition function
takes the form of an expected utility:
at(x) = E[ut(y) | x, Dt],
(10)
we can estimate at from noisy utility data {xi, ut,i}nt
i=1, where ut,i = ut(yi). As examples of utility
functions, we have:
1. Probability of improvement (PI): ut(y) = I[y ≥τt];
2. Expected improvement (EI): ut(y) = max(y −τt, 0);
3. Soft expected improvement (sEI): ut(y) = softplus(y −τt);
4. Mean: ut(y) = y;
given a threshold τt for improvement-based utilities, e.g., the largest observation value or a quantile
of the empirical observations distribution (Tiao et al., 2021). A comprehensive summary of typical
utility functions for BO can be found in Wilson et al. (2018). The ones listed above, however, can
be directly expressed as a function of the observations. The soft-plus version of EI (sEI) is added as
a smoother utility variant of EI which remains positive when y ≤τ (cf. Ament et al., 2023).
BO with generative models.
As an illustrative example, consider the case of PI where a(x) =
E[I[y ≥τ] | x] = p(y ≥τ|x), which has been previously applied to train generative models for
black-box optimization using reward surrogate models (Steinberg et al., 2025). Given a sampler for
the conditional distribution p(x|y ≥τ), by Bayes rule, we recover the original PI as:
a(x) = p(y ≥τ|x) = p(x|y ≥τ)p(y ≥τ)
p0(x)
∝p(x|y ≥τ)
p0(x)
.
(11)
The prior p0 is usually known, and it can be set as uninformative p0(x) ∝1 or set to encode prior
information about the optima. We then see that learning a generative model to approximate the pos-
terior above is equivalent to learning a probabilistic classifier for the improvement event y ≥τ, as in
Song et al. (2022). Moreover, if we only have a probabilistic classifier approximating p(y ≥τ|x),
we still need to select candidate points via optimization over the classification probabilities land-
scape, which can be highly non-convex presenting several local optima, as in the usual BO setting
we choose xt+1 as the (global) maximizer of the acquisition function a. In contrast, a generative
model provides us with a direct way to sample candidates x ∼p(x|y ≥τ) which will naturally
concentrate in the regions of highest probability density, and therefore highest utility, according to
the model. Finally, note that this same reasoning can be extended to any other non-negative expected
utility function by training the generative model to approximate:
p∗
t (x) ∝p0(x)at(x) ,
(12)
or similarly p∗
t (x) ∝p0(x) exp at(x), which allows for utilities that might take negative values.
Thus, GenBO admits a generalized Bayesian interpretation as direct inference over the optimum
location x∗rather than f, with p0 serving as a prior over x∗and the acquisition value at(x) as a
utility-based pseudo-likelihood factor (cf. Knoblauch et al., 2022; Souza et al., 2021).
Overview.
Let Q ⊂P(X) be a learnable family of probability distributions over a domain X. We
consider general loss functions of the form:
Lt(q) := λtRt(q) +
nt
X
i=1
ℓi(q) ,
(13)
where ℓi are individual losses over points xi ∈X or pairs of points xi,1, xi,2 ∈X and their
corresponding utility values, λt ≥0 is an optional regularization factor, and Rt : Q →[0, ∞) is a
complexity penalty function. The algorithm starts by learning a proposal from available data Dt−1:
qt−1 ∈argmin
q∈Q
Lt−1(q) .
(14)
A batch Bt := {xt,i}B
i=1 is sampled from the learned proposal qt−1. We evaluate the utilities ut(yt,i)
with the collected observations yt,i ∼p(y|xt,i), for i ∈{1, . . . , B}, and repeat the cycle up to a
given number of iterations T ∈N. This process is summarized in Algorithm 1. In the following, we
describe strategies to formulate general losses ℓi to learn acquisition functions and how to ensure
that the sequence of batches {Bt}∞
t=1 asymptotically concentrates at the global optima.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Algorithm 1: Generative BO
Input: Domain X, initial data D0
for t ∈{1, . . . , T} do
qt−1 ∈argminq∈Q Lt−1(q)
// Fit proposal distribution
Bt = {xt,i}B
i=1 ∼qt−1
// Sample batch
yt,i ←f(xt,i) + ϵt,i, for i ∈{1, . . . , B}
// Collect observations
Dt = Dt−1 ∪{xt,i, yt,i}B
i=1
// Update data
3.1
PREFERENCE-BASED LEARNING
We first aim to apply a similar reparameterization trick to the one in DPO to simplify generative BO
methods. Note that, for a general classification loss, such as the one in Equation 3, it is not possible
to eliminate the partition function resulting from a DPO-like reparameterization without resorting
to approximations, which might change the learned model. Hence, we need a pairwise-contrastive
training objective.
Preference loss.
To apply a preference-based loss, we can train a model to predict preferential di-
rections of the acquisition function. Assume we have a dataset Du
n := {xi, ui}n
i=1 with n evaluations
of a given utility function u : R →R. We may reorganize the data into pairs of inputs and corre-
sponding utility values {xi,1, xi,2, ui,1, ui,2}n/2
i=1, where ui,j := u(yi,j), for j ∈{1, 2}, and train a
generative model q using the Bradley-Terry preference loss from DPO with, for i ∈{1, . . . , n/2}:
ℓPL
i (q) := ℓPL
i (q, ∆ui) := −log σ

η sign(∆ui)

log
 q(xi,1)
p0(xi,1)

−log
 q(xi,2)
p0(xi,2)

, (15)
where ∆ui := ui,1 −ui,2, as in the DPO formulation, η > 0 is a (optional) temperature parameter
and the prior p0 can be given by a reference model, either pre-trained or derived from expert knowl-
edge about feasible solutions to the optimization problem (1). Similar to Rafailov et al. (2023), the
learned generative model is seeking to approximate:
p∗
u(x) := 1
ζu
p0(x) exp
1
η E[u(y)|x]

,
(16)
where ζu is the normalization factor.
Robust preference loss.
As shown in Chowdhury et al. (2024), the original DPO loss is not robust
to preference noise. As in BO, one usually only observes noisy evaluations of the objective function,
utility values directly derived from the observation values will also be noisy and correspondingly the
sign of their differences as well. Namely, assume there is a small pflip ∈(0, 1/2) probability of the
preference directions being flipped w.r.t. the sign of the true expected utility:
P [sign(ui,1 −ui,2) = sign(E[ui,2|xi,2] −E[ui,1|xi,1])] = pflip .
(17)
Chowdhury et al. (2024) showed that the original DPO preference loss is biased in this noisy case,
and proposed a robust version of the DPO loss to address this issue as:
ℓrPL
i
(q) := (1 −pflip)ℓPL(q, ∆ui) −pflipℓPL
i (q, −∆ui)
1 −2pflip
,
(18)
which yields the robust preference loss (rPL). It follows that the loss function above is unbiased and
robust to observation noise under mild assumptions (Chowdhury et al., 2024).
3.2
DIVERGENCE-BASED LEARNING
A disadvantage of DPO-based losses when applied to BO is that they only take the signs of the pair-
wise utility differences into account, discarding the remaining information contained in the magni-
tude of the utilities. A simpler approach is to train the generative model q to match p∗
u directly.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Forward KL.
If we formulate the target distribution as p∗
u(x) ∝p0(x)a(x), the forward
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of the proposal w.r.t. the target is given by:
DKL(p∗
u||q) = Ex∼p∗u[log p∗
u(x) −log q(x)] .
(19)
As we do not have samples from p∗
u, at each iteration t the algorithm generates samples from the
current best approximation Bt := {xt,i}B
i=1 ∼qt−1. An unbiased training objective can then be
formulated as:
ℓfKL
i
(q) = −p0(xi)
qi−1(xi)u(yi) log q(xi) ,
(20)
which we write in a condensed form to avoid notation clutter where qi−1 denotes the proposal density
used to sample xi under the re-indexed sequence of observations. The objective above is unbiased
and its global optimum can be shown to converge to p∗
u by an application of standard results from
the adaptive importance sampling literature (Delyon & Portier, 2018). A simpler version of this
training objective was derived for CbAS (Brookes et al., 2019) using only the last batch for training,
which would allow for convergence only as the batch size goes to infinity B →∞. Furthermore, as
we discuss in our analysis, convergence to p∗
u is not sufficient to ensure convergence to the global
optima of the objective function f.
Balanced forward KL.
As utilities like those of PI and EI can evaluate to 0 at the points where
y < τ was observed, with τ corresponding to an improvement threshold, every point below the
threshold will not be penalized by the loss function. As a result, the model may keep high probability
densities in regions of low utility. To prevent this, we may use an alternative formulation of the
forward KL which comes from the definition of Bregman divergences with the convex function
u 7→u log u, yielding a loss:
ℓbfKL
i
(q) = −p0(xi)
qi−1(xi)u(yi) log q(xi) +
q(xi)
qi−1(xi) .
(21)
We defer the details of the derivation to the appendix. Although the additional q(x) only contributes
to a constant term when integrated over, for finite-sample approximations, it contributes to a soft
penalty on points where it is observed that u(y) = 0.
3.3
GENERALIZATIONS
In general, we can extend the above framework to use a proper scoring rule S : P(X) × X →R
(Gneiting & Raftery, 2007) other than the log loss. We can then optimize q using losses of the form:
ℓS
i (q) = −p0(xi)
qi−1(xi)u(yi)S(q, xi) .
(22)
Although we leave the exploration of this formulation for future work, it is essentially compatible
with our proposed theoretical framework and readily extensible to generative models that may not
have densities available in closed form, such as diffusion and flow matching (Lipman et al., 2024),
which still provide flexible probabilistic models.
4
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
In this section, we present a theoretical analysis for the algorithm’s approximation of the utility-
based target distribution p∗
u and its performance in regards to the global optimization problem (1).
We consider parametric generative models qθ with a given parameter space Θ ⊂RM. For the
purpose of our analysis, we will assume that models can be described as qθ(x) = exp gθ(x), which
is possible whenever probability densities are strictly positive qθ(x) > 0. To accommodate for both
the pairwise preference-based losses and the point-based divergence approximations, we introduce
the following notation for the loss function:
Ln(gθ) = Rn(gθ) +
n
X
i=1
wiℓ(mi(gθ), zi) ,
(23)
where mi(gθ) corresponds to the ith model evaluation with, e.g., mi(gθ) := gθ(xi) = log qθ(xi)
for KL, and mi(gθ) := gθ(xi,1) −gθ(xi,2) for preference-based losses, zi encodes the dependence
on utility values with zi := u(yi) for KL and zi := sign(ui,1 −ui,2) for DPO losses, and wi are
potential importance weights.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Regularity assumptions.
We make a few mild regularity assumptions about the problem setting
and the model. Firstly, for the analysis, we assume that the models gθ lie in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) Hk shared with the true log density g∗, which is such that p∗
u(x) = exp g∗(x).
This assumption does not impose that the proposals are kernel models, but simply that they lie in
Hilbert space of functions with well defined point evaluations. The domain X is assumed to be a
compact metric space, with main results specialized for the finite discrete setting, i.e., |X| < ∞.
The individual losses ℓ: R × R →R are strictly convex and twice differentiable w.r.t. their first
argument. We also assume that the regularizer Rn is strongly convex and twice differentiable. The
rest of our assumptions and proofs are presented and discussed in more detail in Appendix B.
Lemma 1. Let assumptions A2 to A4 be satisfied. Then,
1
2∥g −gn∥2
Hn ≤Ln(g) −Ln(gn) ≤1
2∥∇Ln(g)∥2
H−1
n ,
where Hn : Hk →Hk is an operator-valued lower bound on the Hessian of the loss Ln:
∀g ∈Hk,
∇2Ln(g) ⪰Hn := λnI + αℓbw
n
X
i=1
mi ⊗mi .
Remark 1. The result in Lemma 1 automatically ensures that the loss functional Ln is strongly
convex over the function space, as ∇2Ln(g) ⪰Hn ⪰λnI ≻0, for all g ∈Hk, and therefore has
a unique minimizer at gn, defined in Section B.3. Note, however, that the same cannot be implied
about Ln(gθ) over Θ based on this result alone, since the mapping θ 7→g(·, θ) may not be linear.
Theorem 1. Let assumptions A1 to A5 hold. Then, given any δ ∈(0, 1),
∀n ∈N,
|⟨m, g∗⟩k −⟨m, gθn⟩k| ≤βn(δ)(∥m∥H−1
n
+ 2|⟨m, ι⟩k|vn(¯qn)),
∀m ∈Hk,
which holds with probability at least 1 −δ, where βn(δ) is given by Lemma 5, where ι(x) = 1
denotes the unit constant function, vn(q) := Ex∼q
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
, and ¯qn := p∗
u+qn
2
.
The result above shows that the approximation error for the optimal parameter θn concentrates
similarly to that of a kernel method, even though we do not require the model to be a kernel machine.
In addition, the term ∥m∥H−1
n is associated with the predictive variance of a Gaussian process model,
which can be shown to converge to zero if, e.g., infx∈X qθ(x) ≥bq > 0, for all θ ∈Θ (see Lemma 4
in the appendix). Alternatively, one can follow a KL-focused analysis as in Oliveira et al. (2021)
to bound DKL(qθn||q∗) via the information gain, which bounds the growth of predictive uncertainty
terms ∥mn∥2
H−1
n−1 appearing in Theorem 1. The asymptotic rate of βn is discussed in Remark 4.
Optimality.
Theorem 1 allows us to establish that the model converges to the target g∗associated
with the target distribution p∗
u for a given utility function u, provided ∥m∥H−1
n
vanishes sufficiently
fast. However, convergence to the target distribution alone does not ensure optimality of the samples
x ∼qt. The latter is possible by applying results from reward-weighted regression, which shows
that training a proposal to maximize Ey∼p(y|x),x∼qt−1[u(y) log q(x)] yields a sequence of increasing
expected rewards E[u(yt)] ≤E[u(yt+1)] ≤. . . (ˇStrupl et al., 2022, Thm. 4.1). If the maximizer
of the sequence of expected utilities converges to the maximizer of the objective function f, then
the generative BO proposals will concentrate at f’s global optima. Therefore, for KL-based loss
functions, one may drop the proposal densities in the importance sampling weights 1/qi−1(xi) to
promote this posterior concentration phenomenon, as corroborated by our experimental findings,
which generally did not include importance weights. This same concentration of the learned tar-
get distribution should also occur with the preference-based loss functions due to the absence of
importance-sampling weights. If these targets concentrate on the optimizer set, simple regret may
vanish, whereas sublinear cumulative regret requires rate control that we leave for future work.
5
RELATED WORK
Using generative models for online-optimization is becoming an increasingly popular strategy for
optimization in discrete, mixed discrete-continuous or high-dimensional design spaces where clas-
sical BO is limited. The following discusses other works applying generative models to BO settings
and contrasts them with the reward-model-free active generation framework we propose.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Latent-space BO.
In latent-space BO (LSBO) methods for high-dimensional problems (G´omez-
Bombarelli et al., 2018; Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023), one learns a probabilistic represen-
tation of a (usually lower-dimensional) manifold of the data jointly with f, and performs BO in that
space, projecting query points back to the original space at evaluation time. This technique has led
to numerous BO methods for high-dimensional and discrete-space optimization (G´omez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Gruver et al., 2023; Gonz´alez-Duque et al., 2024). Learning this latent space can, how-
ever, cause complications. LSBO can suffer poor sample efficiency if the latent space is learned
from the initial training set and then fixed (Tripp et al., 2020). Or poor performance can arise from
reconstruction errors between the latent and observation space (Lee et al., 2025). GenBO and other
methods like VSD do not suffer from these issues as all inference is done in the observation space.
Lastly, despite recent advances in the field (Chu et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2025; Moss et al., 2025), to
our knowledge, LaMBO-2 remains state-of-the-art in LSBO for long sequences, like proteins.
Diffusion for BBO.
There has been recent progress in adapting denoising diffusion models to
black-box optimization (BBO) tasks, often by learning a model that can be conditioned on observa-
tion values, given a dataset of evaluations (Krishnamoorthy et al., 2023). Other approaches involve
guiding the diffusion process by a given utility function derived from a regression model (Gruver
et al., 2023; Yun et al., 2025). Note, however, that such methodologies are specific to diffusion,
whereas we focus on a general approach that can be applied to arbitrary generative models.
LLMs and BO.
Recent work has begun to integrate large language models (LLMs) into BO
pipelines, primarily to inject prior knowledge, improve cold-start performance, or offload certain
design decisions to a learned policy. Several studies use LLMs as contextual priors over the design
space: for example, guiding initialization or proposal generation by leveraging natural-language do-
main knowledge (Liu et al., 2024), or selecting acquisition functions adaptively via an LLM-driven
controller (Aglietti et al., 2025). Other work treats BO as a test-time search tool that an LLM can
call to refine or validate its own proposals during inference (Agarwal et al., 2025). Most relevant
to our setting is a recent reward-model-free approach for protein engineering (Chen et al., 2025),
which uses LLM preference modeling, akin to DPO, to steer search without an explicit surrogate.
This shares the reward-model-free philosophy of GenBO, but differs fundamentally in relying on a
general-purpose LLM, whereas GenBO provides a framework for task-specific generative black-box
optimization problems with no language interface or pretrained reward structure.
6
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate several variants of generative BO (GenBO) on a number of challenging sequence op-
timization tasks against popular and strong baselines, including CbAS (Brookes et al., 2019), VSD
(Steinberg et al., 2025), and LaMBO-2 (Gruver et al., 2023), besides trivial baselines, random mu-
tations and a genetic algorithm (GA) implemented in POLI (Gonz´alez-Duque et al., 2024). As per-
formance measures, we assess the simple regret, rt := f(x∗) −maxi≤nt f(xi), and the cumulative
maximum, maxi≤nt f(xi), where nt := |Dt| is the number of function evaluations up to round t.
In legend boxes, algorithms are sorted in descending order of final average regret. Shaded areas cor-
respond to ±1 standard deviation across five different random seeds. Appendix C presents further
details about experiment settings and ablation studies. Table 4 and 5 summarize final results.
6.1
TEXT OPTIMIZATION
As a first experiment, we wish to optimize a short sequence (5 letters) to minimize the edit distance
to the sequence ALOHA, which is implemented as a POLI black-box (Gonz´alez-Duque et al., 2024).
Here X = VM where V is the English alphabet, and M is sequence length. Even though this
sequence is relatively short, still |X| = |V|M > 11.8 million elements. We increase the difficulty
by only allowing |D0| = 64 where the minimum edit distance is 4, B = 8, and T = 10. We
compare GenBO to the classifier guided VSD (Steinberg et al., 2025) and CbAS (Brookes et al.,
2019), and to a simple greedy baseline that applies (3) random mutations to its best candidates per-
round (Gonz´alez-Duque et al., 2024). For GenBO, VSD and CbAS we use a simple mean-field
(independent) categorical proposal distribution, q, and a uniform prior, p0. VSD and CbAS use a
simple embedding and 1-hidden layer MLP classifier for estimating PI. We also varied the threshold
τ annealing schedule. Architectural details and other experimental specifics are given in Section C.1.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Results are summarized in Figure 1a. We can see that the random baseline is not able to make much
headway and CbAS under-performs due to its limited use of data (last batch only) in retraining.
For this experiment, GenBO with the robust preference loss (rPL) and EI-based utilities showed
the quickest improvements, whereas PI is able to reach the exact optimum at the end, with VSD
eventually also achieving good performance. In Figure 5 (appendix), we present an ablation study
on the threshold τt annealing scheme we used to balance the exploration-exploitation trade-off for
GenBO and PI-based baselines (VSD and CbAS). The plots reveal that this problem generally favors
a more exploitative approach by concentrating on higher quantiles of the observations marginal
distribution. GenBO was, however, relatively less sensitive to the choice of annealing scheme, as
long as the final percentile was set anywhere above 90%, whereas VSD required a generally sharper
rise to above the 95% quantile towards the end of the optimization process, favoring original settings
suggested by Steinberg et al. (2025). We also find that in this problem the use of a pre-trained
informative prior p0 may not bring significant performance advantage, as GenBO variants with no
prior (i.e., p0 ∝1) performed best. Lastly, we also highlight significant improvements in run time
for GenBO, making it on average 3 times faster than VSD (see Table 6 in the appendix) for not
needing to fit an intermediate surrogate model.
(a) ALOHA
(b) Stability
(c) SASA
Figure 1: Performance of baseline black box optimizers and GenBO variants on the (a) ALOHA, (b)
stability, and (c) solvent accessible surface area optimization problems.
(a) M = 15
(b) M = 32
(c) M = 64
Figure 2: Simple regret of the baseline black box optimizers and the GenBO variants on the Ehrlich
closed-form test function protein design task for varying sequence lengths, M.
6.2
PROTEIN DESIGN
We now consider three protein sequence design tasks where |V| = 20 and we have varying M.
We again use VSD, CbAS and random mutation as baselines, and add to them the guided diffusion
based LaMBO-2 (Gruver et al., 2023). GenBO, VSD and CbAS all share the same generative
backbone, which is the causal transformer used in Steinberg et al. (2025); VSD and CbAS also use
the same CNN-classifier guide used in that work. We present additional architectural information,
and additional experimental details in Section C.2. We use the black-box implementations in POLI
for these tasks, and POLI-BASELINES implementations of the random and LaMBO-2 baselines.
The first task we consider is optimization of the Ehrlich functions introduced by Stanton et al.
(2024). These are challenging biologically inspired parametric closed-form functions that explicitly
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
simulate nonlinear (epistatic) effects of sequence on outcome. The outcomes are y ∈{−1} ∪[0, 1]
where −1 is reserved for infeasible sequences. We use the same protocol as in Steinberg et al.
(2025), where we optimize sequences of length M = {15, 32, 64} all with motif lengths of 4,
and |D0| = 128, T = 32 and B = 128. The results are summarized in Figure 2. We again see that
GenBO variants are able to outperform or match the performance of baselines, with KL-based losses
yielding the best performance. In higher dimensions with the longest sequence setting, the benefits
of the balanced forward KL loss, with its density minimization effect in areas of lower utility, are
more evident. In addition, we note that exponential regularization, corresponding to assuming an
exponential dot-product kernel for the RKHS feature space of the model (see Remark 2), allowed for
the best performance in higher dimensions. Lastly, in Figure 6 (appendix), we present an ablation
study on the batch size setting B, showing monotonic improvements, especially for large B ≥32.
(a) Stability
(b) SASA
Figure 3: Batch diversity scores per round on the FoldX protein optimization tasks.
For our final set of experiments we present two real protein optimization tasks. These experiments
have been adapted from Stanton et al. (2022) where the aims are to maximize the stability and solvent
accessible surface area (SASA) of the proteins, respectively. The black-box is the FoldX molecular
simulation software (Schymkowitz et al., 2005), and is wrapped by POLI (Gonz´alez-Duque et al.,
2024). We chose the mRouge red fluorescent protein (M = 228) as the base protein for the tasks.
Both tasks were run for T = 20 rounds with a batch size of B = 64 and an initial training set of
|D0| = 88 as a subset from Stanton et al. (2022). Results are summarized in Figure 1b for stability
and Figure 1c for SASA. All variants of GenBO find the stability task challenging, along with the
LaMBO-2 and random baselines. CbAS and especially VSD are better able to stabilize this protein.
As shown by diversity scores in Figure 3a, which we measure by averaging the Levenshtein distance
across the batch in the same way as Steinberg et al. (2025), algorithmic baselines with the lowest
diversity yielded top performance, indicating that pure exploitation from around the starting dataset
led to the highest outcomes. However, most variants of GenBO far outperform the baselines on the
SASA task, and much more rapidly. We believe this task favors extrapolation away from the prior,
due to the high performance of GenBO variants with uninformative prior. In contrast to the stability,
the diversity scores show that increasing exploration led to better outcomes for SASA (Figure 3b).
7
CONCLUSION
This work introduces Generative Bayesian Optimization (GenBO), a unifying framework that turns
any generative model into a sampler whose density tracks BO acquisition functions. We have shown
that loss functions over generative models, such as DPO and KL divergences, can be applied to
directly learn samplers for batch BO. By eliminating intermediate regression or classification surro-
gates, GenBO reduces approximation error, simplifies the pipeline to learning just a single generative
model, and scales naturally to large batches and high-dimensional or combinatorial design spaces.
Theoretical results show convergence to the target distribution, and experiments on text optimization
and protein design tasks demonstrate competitive performance with more complex surrogate-guided
baselines. A few challenges remain. For some variants, GenBO requires choosing and fixing the
prior before optimization, and its performance depends on sensible settings of utility and temperature
parameters, whose theory could be further explored. Another avenue is the adaptation to acquisition
strategies not expressible as expected utilities, such as Thompson sampling and upper confidence
bound. Despite these caveats, GenBO’s minimal moving parts and principled acquisition-driven
training mark a simpler and more scalable alternative to multi-stage guided generation methods.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori. Online Learning for Linearly Parametrized Control Problems. PhD, Univer-
sity of Alberta, 2012.
Dhruv Agarwal, Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Rajarshi Das, Sandesh Swamy, Sopan Khosla, and
Rashmi Gangadharaiah. Searching for optimal solutions with LLMs via Bayesian optimization.
In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Virginia Aglietti, Ira Ktena, Jessica Schrouff, Eleni Sgouritsa, Francisco Ruiz, Alan Malek, Alexis
Bellot, and Silvia Chiappa. FunBO: Discovering acquisition functions for Bayesian optimization
with FunSearch. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Sebastian Ament, Samuel Daulton, David Eriksson, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Un-
expected improvements to expected improvement for Bayesian optimization. In 37th Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans, LA, USA, 2023.
Javad Azimi, Alan Fern, and Xiaoli Z. Fern. Batch Bayesian optimization via simulation matching.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23: 24th Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2010 (NIPS 2010), 2010.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback.
arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2204.05862, April 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.05862.
Heejong Bong and Alessandro Rinaldo. Generalized results for the existence and consistency of the
MLE in the Bradley-Terry-Luce model. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2160–
2177. PMLR, 2022.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
David Brookes, Hahnbeom Park, and Jennifer Listgarten. Conditioning by adaptive sampling for
robust design. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pp. 773–782, Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019. PMLR.
Roberto Calandra, Andr´e Seyfarth, Jan Peters, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Bayesian optimization
for learning gaits under uncertainty. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 76(1):
5–23, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s10472-015-9463-9.
Angelica Chen, Samuel D. Stanton, Frances Ding, Robert G. Alberstein, Andrew M. Watkins,
Richard Bonneau, Vladimir Gligorijevic, Kyunghyun Cho, and Nathan C. Frey. Generalists vs.
specialists: Evaluating LLMs on highly-constrained biophysical sequence optimization tasks. In
Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Ma-
haraj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu (eds.), Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9029–9072.
PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Aditya Gopalan. On Kernelized Multi-armed Bandits. In Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Sydney, Australia, 2017.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury, Anush Kini, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Provably robust DPO: Aligning
language models with noisy feedback. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller,
Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the
41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pp. 42258–42274. PMLR, 2024.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jaewon Chu, Jinyoung Park, Seunghun Lee, and Hyunwoo J. Kim. Inversion-based latent Bayesian
optimization. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2024.
Zhongxiang Dai, Yao Shu, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet.
Sample-then-optimize
batch neural Thompson sampling. In 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS 2022), New Orleans, LA, USA, 2022.
Bernard Delyon and Franc¸ois Portier. Asymptotic optimality of adaptive importance sampling. In
S Bengio, H Wallach, H Larochelle, K Grauman, N Cesa-Bianchi, and R Garnett (eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, Montr´eal, Canada, 2018. Curran
Associates, Inc.
Audrey Durand, Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, and Joelle Pineau. Streaming kernel regression with
provably adaptive mean, variance, and regularization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19
(1):650–683, 2018.
Peter I. Frazier and Jialei Wang.
Bayesian Optimization for Materials Design, pp. 45–75.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016.
ISBN 978-3-319-23871-5.
doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-23871-5 3.
Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2023. URL https://
bayesoptbook.com/.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007.
Rafael G´omez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, Jos´e Miguel Hern´andez-Lobato,
Benjam´ın S´anchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
Ryan P Adams, and Al´an Aspuru-Guzik.
Automatic chemical design using a data-driven
continuous representation of molecules.
ACS Central Science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.
doi:
10.1021/acscentsci.7b00572.
Miguel Gonz´alez-Duque, Richard Michael, Simon Bartels, Yevgen Zainchkovskyy, Søren Hauberg,
and Wouter Boomsma. A survey and benchmark of high-dimensional Bayesian optimization of
discrete sequences. In The 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
Datasets and Benchmarks Track, Vancouver, Canada, 2024.
Miguel Gonz´alez-Duque, Simon Bartels, and Richard Michael. Poli: A library of discrete sequence
objectives, 2024.
URL https://github.com/MachineLearningLifeScience/
poli.
Nate Gruver, Samuel Stanton, Nathan Frey, Tim G.J. Rudner, Isidro Hotzel, Julien Lafrance-
Vanasse, Arvind Rajpal, Kyunghyun Cho, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
Protein design with
guided discrete diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
New Orleans, LA, USA, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
human-level performance on ImageNet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Cl´ement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
eralization in neural networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 8580–8589, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran
Associates Inc.
Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Jeff Schneider, and Barnabas Poczos.
Asyn-
chronous parallel Bayesian optimisation via Thompson sampling. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), Lanzarote, Spain,
2018.
Jeremias Knoblauch, Jack Jewson, and Theodoros Damoulas.
An optimization-centric view on
Bayes’ rule: Reviewing and generalizing variational inference. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 23(132), 2022.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Siddarth Krishnamoorthy, Satvik Mehul Mashkaria, and Aditya Grover. Diffusion models for black-
box optimization. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 17842–17857.
PMLR, 2023.
Seunghun Lee, Jinyoung Park, Jaewon Chu, Minseo Yoon, and Hyunwoo J. Kim. Latent Bayesian
optimization via autoregressive normalizing flows. In The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2025.
Yucen Lily Li, Tim G. J. Rudner, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. A study of Bayesian neural network
surrogates for Bayesian optimization. In 2024 International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), Vienna, Austria, 2024. OpenReview.
Yaron Lipman, Marton Havasi, Peter Holderrieth, Neta Shaul, Matt Le, Brian Karrer, Ricky T. Q.
Chen, David Lopez-Paz, Heli Ben-Hamu, and Itai Gat. Flow matching guide and code. arXiv
e-prints, 2024.
Tennison Liu, Nicol´as Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large language models
to enhance Bayesian optimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2024.
Henry Moss, Sebastian W. Ober, and Tom Diethe. Return of the latent space COWBOYS: Re-
thinking the use of VAEs for Bayesian optimisation of structured spaces. In Forty-second Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Rafael Oliveira, Lionel Ott, and Fabio Ramos. No-regret approximate inference via Bayesian opti-
misation. In 37th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2021), 2021.
Rafael Oliveira, Louis Tiao, and Fabio T. Ramos. Batch Bayesian optimisation via density-ratio
estimation with guarantees.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:29816–
29829, 2022.
Mary Phuong and Marcus Hutter.
Formal algorithms for transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.09238, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
In Advances in neural information processing systems, volume 36, pp. 53728–53741, 2023.
Carl E. Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2006.
Saburou Saitoh and Yoshihiro Sawano. Theory of Reproducing Kernels and Applications. Springer,
2016.
Bernhard Sch¨olkopf and Alexander J. Smola. Learning with kernels: support vector machines,
regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 2002.
Joost Schymkowitz, Jesper Borg, Francois Stricher, Robby Nys, Frederic Rousseau, and Luis Ser-
rano. The foldx web server: an online force field. Nucleic Acids Research, 33:W382–W388, July
2005. ISSN 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gki387.
Nihar B. Shah, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Joseph Bradley, Abhay Parekh, Kannan Ramchandran,
and Martin J. Wainwright. Estimation from pairwise comparisons: Sharp minimax bounds with
topology dependence. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17, 2016.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
human out of the loop: A review of Bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):
148–175, 2016.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine
learning algorithms.
In F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger (eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pp. 2951–2959. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2012.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jiaming Song, Lantao Yu, Willie Neiswanger, and Stefano Ermon. A general recipe for likelihood-
free Bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 2022. PMLR 162.
Artur Souza, Luigi Nardi, Leonardo B Oliveira, Kunle Olukotun, Marius Lindauer, and Frank Hut-
ter. Bayesian Optimization with a Prior for the Optimum. In Nuria Oliver, Fernando P´erez-Cruz,
Stefan Kramer, Jesse Read, and Jose A Lozano (eds.), Machine Learning and Knowledge Discov-
ery in Databases. Research Track, pp. 265–296, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-030-86523-8.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M. Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process op-
timization in the Bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2010), pp. 1015–1022, 2010.
Samuel Stanton, Wesley Maddox, Nate Gruver, Phillip Maffettone, Emily Delaney, Peyton Green-
side, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Accelerating Bayesian optimization for biological sequence
design with denoising autoencoders.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
20459–20478. PMLR, 2022.
Samuel Stanton, Robert Alberstein, Nathan Frey, Andrew Watkins, and Kyunghyun Cho.
Closed-form test functions for biophysical sequence optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.00236, 2024.
Daniel M. Steinberg, Rafael Oliveira, Cheng Soon Ong, and Edwin V. Bonilla. Variational search
distributions. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, Singa-
pore, 2025.
Ingo Steinwart and Andreas Christmann. Kernels and reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. In Support
Vector Machines, chapter 4, pp. 110–163. Springer, New York, NY, 2008.
Miroslav ˇStrupl, Francesco Faccio, Dylan R Ashley, Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, and J¨urgen Schmid-
huber. Reward-weighted regression converges to a global optimum. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8361–8369, 2022.
Shion Takeno, Hitoshi Fukuoka, Yuhki Tsukada, Toshiyuki Koyama, Motoki Shiga, Ichiro Takeuchi,
and Masayuki Karasuyama. Multi-fidelity Bayesian optimization with max-value entropy search
and its parallelization. In 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2020),
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9276–9287. PMLR, 2020.
Felix Teufel, Carsten Stahlhut, and Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg. Batched energy-entropy acquisition for
Bayesian optimization. In 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS
2024), Vancouver, Canada, 2024.
Louis C. Tiao, Aaron Klein, Matthias Seeger, Edwin V. Bonilla, Cedric Archambeau, and Fabio
Ramos. BORE: Bayesian optimization by density-ratio estimation. In Proceedings of the 38th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2021.
Austin Tripp, Erik Daxberger, and Jos´e Miguel Hern´andez-Lobato. Sample-efficient optimization
in the latent space of deep generative models via weighted retraining. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 33:11259–11272, 2020.
James T. Wilson, Frank Hutter, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Maximizing acquisition functions for
Bayesian optimization. In 32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS
2018), Montr´eal, Canada, 2018.
Taeyoung Yun, Kiyoung Om, Jaewoo Lee, Sujin Yun, and Jinkyoo Park. Posterior Inference with
Diffusion Models for High-dimensional Black-box Optimization. In Forty-second International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Vancouver, Canada, 2025.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
GAUSSIAN PROCESSES FOR BO
Assume a Gaussian process prior over f, e.g., f ∼GP(0, k), where k : X × X →R is a positive-
definite kernel (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Then, given a set of observations Dn := {xi, yi}n
i=1,
corrupted by Gaussian noise ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
ϵ ), the posterior f|Dn ∼GP( ˆfn, kn) is available in closed
form with mean and covariance function given by:
ˆfn(x) := kn(x)T(Kn + σ2
ϵ I)−1yn
(24)
kn(x, x′) := k(x, x′) −kn(x)T(Kn + σ2
ϵ I)−1kn(x′)
(25)
σ2
n(x) := kn(x, x),
(26)
where kn(x) := [k(x, xi)]n
i=1 ∈Rn, Kn := [k(xi, xj)]n
i,j=1 ∈Rn×n, yn := [yi]n
i=1 ∈Rn, for
x, x′ ∈X. With these closed-form expressions, GP models allow BO algorithms to quantify uncer-
tainty and assess expected utilities of their decisions. However, note that, due to matrix inversions,
exact GP inference incurs a computational cost of O(n3). Hence, one often has to resort to low-rank
approximations to make GP predictions tractable in cases involving large amounts of data, such as
batch evaluations with large batch size. Alternatively, one may completely discard the GP models
and use other surrogates, such as neural networks, and there has been an increasing literature on how
to reliably quantify uncertainty for BO when using these models (Li et al., 2024).
B
LEARNING PARAMETRIC MODELS WITH RKHS CONVEX LOSSES
In this section, we consider the general problem of learning a function g∗with a parametric model
g : X × Θ →R, where the parameter space Θ is an arbitrary finite-dimensional vector space.
Most existing results in the Bayesian optimization and bandits literature for learning these models
from inherently dependent data are only valid for linear models or kernel machines. As we will
consider arbitrary generative models, we need to derive convergence results applicable to a wider
class of models, accommodating popular modern frameworks. To do so, we will assume that there
exists a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) containing the models and the target log-density
g∗= log p∗
u for a given (fixed) utility function u.
B.1
MAIN DEFINITIONS
We will need the following definitions to state our main assumptions and results.
Definition 1 (RKHS). Let X be a non-empty set. A Hilbert space H of real-valued functions over
X is called a reproducing kernel Hilbert space if function evaluations are bounded, that is:
∀x ∈X,
∃cx < ∞:
∀h ∈H,
h(x) ≤cx∥h∥H.
Any Hilbert space H satisfying the condition above is associated with a unique positive-semidefinite
kernel k : X × X →R with the reproducing property (Sch¨olkopf & Smola, 2002):
∀h ∈H
h(x) = ⟨h, k(·, x)⟩H,
∀x ∈X,
(27)
where ⟨·, ·⟩H denotes the inner product in H, which also defines the norm ∥h∥H =
p
⟨h, h⟩H, for
h ∈H. In fact, it can be shown that H is spanned by {k(·, x)}x∈X (Steinwart & Christmann, 2008,
Thm. 4.21). Hence, given a positive-semidefinite kernel k, we will use the notation ⟨·, ·⟩k and ∥·∥k
to denote the inner product and the norm, respectively, in the corresponding RKHS Hk.
Definition 2 (Strong convexity). A differentiable function f : H →R on a Hilbert space H is
α-strongly convex over S ⊆H, for a given α > 0, if:
∀h, h′ ∈S,
f(h) ≥f(h′) + ⟨∇f(h′), h −h′⟩+ α
2 ∥h −h′∥2
H .
Definition 3 (Smoothness). A function f : H →Y between Hilbert spaces H and Y is η-smooth
over S ⊆H, for a given η > 0, if:
∀h, h′ ∈S,
∥f(h) −f(h′)∥Y ≤η∥h −h′∥H .
(28)
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Definition 4 (Sub-Gaussianity). A random variable ξ taking values in a Hilbert space H is said to
be Σ-sub-Gaussian, given a positive-definite trace-class operator Σ : H →H, if:
∀h ∈H,
E[exp⟨h, ξ⟩] ≤exp
1
2⟨h, Σh⟩

.
(29)
Likewise, a H-valued stochastic process {ξn}∞
n=1 adapted to the filtration {Fn}∞
n=0 is conditionally
Σ-sub-Gaussian if the following almost surely holds:
∀h ∈H,
E[exp⟨h, ξn⟩| Fn−1] ≤exp
1
2⟨h, Σh⟩

,
∀n ∈N.
(30)
B.2
AUXILIARY RESULTS
Lemma 2. Let g : X × Θ →R represent a class of models parameterized by θ ∈Θ. Assume that
g(x; ·) ∈HΘ, for all x ∈X, where HΘ is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space associated with a
positive-definite kernel kΘ : Θ × Θ →R. It then follows that:
Hg := {h : X →R | ∃w ∈HΘ : h(x) = ⟨w, g(x, ·)⟩HΘ, ∀x ∈X}
(31)
equipped with the norm:
∥h∥Hg := inf{∥w∥HΘ : w ∈HΘ, h(x) = ⟨w, g(x, ·)⟩HΘ, ∀x ∈X}
(32)
constitutes the unique RKHS where kg : (x, x′) 7→⟨g(x, ·), g(x′, ·)⟩HΘ is the reproducing kernel.
Proof. This is a direct application of classic RKHS results (e.g., Steinwart & Christmann, 2008,
Thm. 4.21) where we are treating ϕ : x 7→g(x, ·) as a feature map mapping into an existing Hilbert
space HΘ and taking advantage of its structure to define a new one.
Remark 2. The RKHS Hg described above has the special property that, for any θ ∈Θ, the RKHS
norm of the model is given by:
∥g(·, θ)∥2
Hg = kΘ(θ, θ) ,
(33)
since ⟨kΘ(·, θ), g(x, ·)⟩HΘ = g(x, θ) for all x ∈X, and kΘ(·, θ) is the unique representation of the
evaluation functional at θ in the RKHS HΘ. The rest follows from the definition in Equation 32.
Hence, each choice of kΘ gives us a potential RKHS norm regularizer.
Lemma 3 (Abbasi-Yadkori, 2012, Cor. 3.6). Let {Ft}∞
t=0 be an increasing filtration, {ϵt}∞
t=1 be
a real-valued stochastic process, and {ϕt}∞
t=1 be a stochastic process taking values in a separable
real Hilbert space H, with both processes adapted to the filtration. Assume that {ϕt}∞
t=1 is also
predictable, i.e., ϕt is Ft−1-measurable, and that ϵt is conditionally σ2
ϵ -sub-Gaussian, for all t ∈N.
Then, given any δ ∈(0, 1), with probability at least 1 −δ,
∀t ∈N,

t
X
i=1
ϵiϕi

2
(V +ΦtΦT
t )−1
≤2σ2
ϵ log
 
det(I + ΦT
t V −1Φt)
1
2
δ
!
,
for any positive-definite operator V ≻0 on H, and where we set Φt := [ϕ1, . . . , ϕt].
Lemma 4 (GP variance upper bound (Steinberg et al., 2025, Lem. E.5)). Let {xn}n≥1 be a sequence
of X-valued random variables adapted to the filtration {Fn}n≥1. For a given x ∈X, assume that
the following holds:
∃T∗∈N :
∀T ≥T∗,
T
X
n=1
P [xn = x | Fn−1] ≥bT > 0 ,
(34)
for a some sequence of lower bounds {bn}n∈N. Then, for a bounded kernel k : X × X →R given
observations at {xi}n
i=1, the following holds with probability 1:
σ2
n(x) ∈O(b−1
n ).
(35)
In addition, if bn →∞, then limn→∞bnσ2
n(x) ≤σ2
ϵ .
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B.3
MAIN ASSUMPTIONS
Loss.
Given data Dn := {xi, yi}n
i=1, for the analysis, we consider loss functionals defined over
an RKHS Hk with the form:
Ln(g) = Rn(g) +
n
X
i=1
wiℓ(mi(g), zi) ,
g ∈Hk,
(36)
where ℓ: R × R →R is a fixed deterministic function, wi > 0 represents importance sampling
weights (or wi ∝1 when importance weights are not used), mi : Hk →R represents a bounded
linear observation functional (e.g., mi(g) = g(xi), or mi(g) = g(xi,1) −g(xi,2)), zi is given
by utility evaluations (e.g., zi = u(yi), or zn,i = u(yi,1) −u(yi,2)), for i ∈{1, . . . , n}, and
Rn : Hk →R is a regularization functional.
Considering the loss structure above, the target loss functional is given by:
L∗(g) =
Z
E[ℓ(m(g), z)]µ( dm).
(37)
For the forward KL loss, for example, the target loss is simply −
R
X p0(x)a(x)g(x) dµ(x), where
µ is a suitable base measure over X with respect to which the probability densities are defined (e.g.,
the counting measure if X is discrete). We then define constrained and unconstrained targets as:
g∗∈
argmin
g∈Hk:
R
eg dµ=1
L∗(g)
(38)
˜g∗∈argmin
g∈Hk
L∗(g).
(39)
Assumption A1 (RKHS). There exists a reproducing kernel Hilbert space Hk, associated with a
positive-definite kernel k : X ×X →R, which is bounded, supx∈X k(x, x) ≤b2
k for a given bk > 0,
such that g∗, constants, and the models can be found as elements of Hk, i.e., {g(·; θ) | θ ∈Θ} ⊂Hk.
The assumption above allows us to consider functions g∗that cannot be perfectly approximated
by the model, though which still lie in the same underlying Hilbert space Hk. The reproducing
kernel assumption is also mild, as it simply means that function evaluations are continuous (i.e.,
well behaved), which cannot usually be guaranteed in other types of Hilbert spaces, such as, e.g., L2-
spaces. In fact, we can always find a RKHS that contains the set of models under mild assumptions,
such as the minimal construction in Lemma 2. The inclusion of constant functions allows for the
unnormalized target ˜g∗to also lie in Hk.
Remark 3. If an RKHS containing the model class (e.g., Hg in Lemma 2) is too small to contain g∗,
we can always combine two RKHS to produce a third one containing all the elements of the two.
For instance, if g∗∈H∗̸= Hg with kernel k∗: X × X →R, we can define k := k∗+ kg, so that
Hk := H∗⊕Hg is also a RKHS (Steinwart & Christmann, 2008; Saitoh & Sawano, 2016). Such H∗
can be minimal, as any function g∗defines a kernel k∗(x, x′) = g∗(x)g∗(x′) for the RKHS formed
by the function’s linear span H∗:= {αg∗| α ∈R}.
Assumption A2 (Regularization). The regularizer Rn is predictable, λn-strongly convex, twice
differentiable, and O(λn)-smooth, for all n ≥1, where {λn}∞
n=1 is a non-decreasing sequence of
positive real numbers, such that λn is at most poly-logarithmic with n.
Regularization.
Common choices of regularization scheme, such as the squared norm, suffice to
satisfy Assumption A2. Strong convexity does not require a function to be twice differentiable, but
such assumption greatly simplifies our analysis and is common in modern deep learning frameworks.
Sublinearity of λn allows for the effect of regularization to disappear as the dataset grows, so that
the empirical Ln can converge to the target L∗as n →∞. Despite the definition of a regularization
functional over the whole of Hk, following Remark 2, we can use any positive-definite kernel kΘ :
Θ × Θ →R compatible with Lemma 2 to set Rn such that, over the model space:
Rn(gθ) = λn
2 ∥gθ∥2
Hg = λn
2 kΘ(θ, θ),
(40)
which allows for differentiation with respect to θ, and whose Hessian ∇2
gRn(g) = λnI shows that
Rn is strongly convex in Hk for λn > 0. In this case, a quadratic regularization penalty ∥θ∥2
2
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
corresponds to the assumption of a linear kernel, i.e., kΘ(θ, θ′) = θ · θ′, which might appear quite
restrictive, as it assumes that our models are linear functions of the parameters. However, note that,
for overparameterized neural networks, at the infinite-width limit the model tends to show linearity
in the parameters (Jacot et al., 2018). If we want to be more parsimonious, alternatively, we can
choose kΘ as a universal kernel, such as the squared exponential, yet preferably not translation
invariant, so that kΘ(θ, θ) is not simply a constant. One kernel satisfying such assumption would
be the exponential dot-product kernel kΘ(θ, θ′) := exp(θ · θ′), which is universal for continuous
functions over compact subsets of Θ. Nevertheless, we do not impose restrictions on the form of the
regularization term Rn other than Assumption A2. Lastly, Rn can also be stochastic as:
Rn(g) = λn
2 ∥g −gn,0∥2
k,
(41)
where ∥·∥k denotes the norm in a general Hk satisfying Assumption A1, and gn,0 may correspond
to a random initialization or a data-dependent term (e.g., the previous set of optimal parameters).
Assumption A3 (Loss). For any y ∈R, the point loss ℓz := ℓ(·, y) : R →R is αℓ-strongly convex,
twice differentiable, and has ηℓ-smooth first-order derivatives. In addition, given any m ∈Hk, we
assume the first-order derivative ˙ℓz(m(˜g∗)) is conditionally σ2
ℓ-sub-Gaussian when y ∼p(y|m).
Regarding sub-Gaussianity, the pointwise derivative of the balanced forward KL loss is given by
˙ℓz(m(g)) = −u + eg(x). Therefore, we have that:
E[ ˙ℓz(m(g)) | x] = eg(x) −a(x),
(42)
which yields ˜g∗(x) = log a(x) at the unconstrained minimizer ˜g∗under mild assumptions on the
kernel and the acquisition function. Therefore, if observation noise is light tailed or the utilities are
bounded, the pointwise derivatives can shown to be sub-Gaussian. The second derivative is simply
eg(x), which is strictly positive, yielding an approximate strong convexity (when restricted to any
bounded subset of the realizations of g(x)). The original Bradley-Terry model in the DPO paper
(Rafailov et al., 2023) is not strongly convex, but its robust version (Chowdhury et al., 2024), which
accounts for preference noise, can be shown to satisfy strong convexity and smoothness.
Assumption A4 (Weights). We have that infn∈N wn ≥bw and supn∈N wn ≤¯bw almost surely, for
constants ¯bw, bw > 0.
Assumption A5 (Density). The model class is dense in the normalized subset of Hk:
C :=

g ∈Hk

Z
eg dµ = 1

.
These last two assumptions allow us to bound the randomness of the loss gradients and ensure that
the optimal models converge to the target distribution. Density here simply means that, for any
g ∈C, we can find a sequence {θi}∞
i=1 such that gθi →g as i →∞. Alternatively, the latter can be
expressed as, for any g ∈C and any given ∆> 0, there exists θ∆∈Θ such that ∥g −gθ∆∥k ≤∆.
Hence, density is a universal approximation condition within the normalized subset of Hk. As Hk
is just a theoretical construct for us, and not fixed by the algorithm, so that we can even span Hk
from the model class (see Lemma 2), Assumption A5 is relatively mild.
We can now analyze the approximation error with respect to g∗for the following estimators:1
θn ∈argmin
θ∈Θ
Ln(gθ)
(43)
gn ∈argmin
g∈Hk
Ln(g) .
(44)
The first one gives us the best parametric approximation gθn based on the data and is what our algo-
rithm will use. The second estimator corresponds to the non-parametric approximation, which we
will use as a tool for our analysis, and not assume as a component of the algorithm. The assumptions
above allow us to bound distances between these estimators and the true g∗as a function of the loss
and gradient values. We also consider the normalized version of gn as:
ˆgn(x) := gn(x) −log
Z
egn dµ,
x ∈X,
(45)
which we use as a reference point to bound distances to the parametric models and to the target g∗.
1We are implicitly assuming that such global optima exist. This is true for the optimization in Hk, as Ln is
strongly convex over it, but that is not guaranteed for the optimization over the parameter space Θ.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B.4
MAIN RESULTS
Lemma 1. Let assumptions A2 to A4 be satisfied. Then,
1
2∥g −gn∥2
Hn ≤Ln(g) −Ln(gn) ≤1
2∥∇Ln(g)∥2
H−1
n ,
where Hn : Hk →Hk is an operator-valued lower bound on the Hessian of the loss Ln:
∀g ∈Hk,
∇2Ln(g) ⪰Hn := λnI + αℓbw
n
X
i=1
mi ⊗mi .
Proof of Lemma 1. The Hessian of the individual losses can be lower bounded by:
∀g ∈Hk,
∇2
gℓ(m(g), z) = ¨ℓz(m(g))∇gm(g) ⊗∇gm(g) + ˙ℓz(m(g))∇2
gm(g)
= ¨ℓz(m(g))m ⊗m
⪰αℓm ⊗m,
∀z ∈R, ∀m ∈M,
(46)
given that ∇gm(g) = ∇g⟨g, m⟩k = m. Combining this result with Assumption A2 and A4, we get:
∀g ∈Hk,
∇2
gLn(g) ⪰λnI + αℓbw
n
X
i=1
mi ⊗mi =: Hn .
(47)
Now applying a first order Taylor expansion to Ln at any g ∈Hk, the error term is controlled by
the Hessian ∇2Ln(¯gn) at an intermediate point ¯gn = sgn + (1 −s)g, for some s ∈[0, 1]. Hence,
expanding Ln around gn, we have that:
∀g ∈Hk,
Ln(g) −Ln(gn) = ⟨∇Ln(gn), g −gn⟩+ 1
2∥g −gn∥2
∇2Ln(¯gn)
≥1
2∥g −gn∥2
Hn ,
(48)
where we applied the Hessian inequality (47) and the fact that ∇Ln(gn) = 0, as gn is a minimizer.
Thus, the lower bound in Lemma 1 follows. Conversely, expanding Ln around any g and evaluating
at gn, we have:
∀g ∈Hk,
Ln(gn) = Ln(g) + ⟨∇Ln(g), gn −g⟩k + 1
2∥gn −g∥2
∇2Ln(¯g′n).
(49)
Rearranging terms yields:
∀g ∈Hk,
Ln(g) −Ln(gn) = ⟨∇Ln(g), g −gn⟩k −1
2∥g −gn∥2
∇2Ln(¯g′
n)
≤sup
¯g∈Hk
⟨∇Ln(g), ¯g⟩k −1
2∥¯g∥2
∇2Ln(¯g′n)
≤sup
¯g∈Hk
⟨∇Ln(g), ¯g⟩k −1
2∥¯g∥2
Hn ,
(50)
whose right-hand side is strongly concave and has therefore a unique maximizer at:
¯g = H−1
n ∇Ln(g) .
(51)
Replacing this result into the previous equation finally leads us to the upper bound in Lemma 1.
Lemma 5. Consider the setting in Lemma 1. Then,
∀n ∈N,
|⟨m, ˜g∗⟩k −⟨m, gn⟩k| ≤∥m∥H−1
n βn(δ), ∀m ∈Hk,
where βn(δ) := λ−1/2
n
∥∇Rn(˜g∗)∥k + σℓ¯bw
q
2(bwαℓ)−1 log(det(I + bwαℓλ−1
n M T
n Mn)1/2/δ),
and Mn := [m1, . . . , mn].
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof. By Lemma 1, for any g ∈Hk, we have that:
|⟨m, gn⟩k −⟨m, g⟩k| = |⟨m, gn −g⟩k|
= |⟨H−1/2
n
m, H1/2
n
(gn −g)⟩k|
≤∥H−1/2
n
m∥∥H1/2
n
(gn −g)∥
= ∥m∥H−1
n ∥gn −g∥Hn
≤∥m∥H−1
n ∥∇Ln(g)∥H−1
n ,
∀m ∈Hk,
(52)
where the first inequality follows by Cauchy-Schwarz, and the last is due to Lemma 1. Expanding
the gradient term, we have:
∥∇Ln(g)∥H−1
n
=
∇Rn(g) +
n
X
i=1
wi ˙ℓyi(⟨mi, g⟩k)mi

H−1
n
≤∥∇Rn(g)∥H−1
n
+

n
X
i=1
wi ˙ℓyi(⟨mi, g⟩k)mi

H−1
n
≤
1
√
λ
∥∇Rn(g)∥k +

n
X
i=1
wi ˙ℓyi(⟨mi, g⟩k)mi

H−1
n
,
(53)
where we applied the triangle inequality to obtain the second line and the fact that Hn ≻λnI
implies H−1
n
≺λ−1
n I led to the last line. For g := ˜g∗, we can then apply Lemma 3 to the noisy
sum above by setting Ft as the σ-algebra generated by the random variables {mi, yi}t
i=1 and mt+1.
Then ϵt :=
1
√bwαℓwt ˙ℓyt(⟨˜g∗, mt⟩k) is conditionally σ2
ϵ -sub-Gaussian by Assumption A3 with σ2
ϵ :=
¯b2
wσ2
ℓ
bwαℓ, since wt ≤¯bw by Assumption A4, and ϕt := √bwαℓmt is predictable, for all t ∈N. An
application of Lemma 3 finally leads us to:

n
X
i=1
˙ℓyi(⟨mi, ˜g∗⟩k)mi

2
H−1
n
≤2¯b2
wσ2
ℓ
bwαℓ
log
 
det(I + bwαℓλ−1
n M T
n Mn)
1
2
δ
!
(54)
which holds uniformly over all n ∈N with probability at least 1 −δ. Hence, it follows that:
∀n ∈N,
∥∇Ln(˜g∗)∥H−1
n
≤
1
√
λ
∥∇Rn(˜g∗)∥k +

n
X
i=1
wi ˙ℓyi(⟨mi, ˜g∗⟩k)mi

H−1
n
≤βn(δ), (55)
with probability at least 1 −δ. Replacing this result into Equation 52 yields the main result.
Theorem 1. Let assumptions A1 to A5 hold. Then, given any δ ∈(0, 1),
∀n ∈N,
|⟨m, g∗⟩k −⟨m, gθn⟩k| ≤βn(δ)(∥m∥H−1
n
+ 2|⟨m, ι⟩k|vn(¯qn)),
∀m ∈Hk,
which holds with probability at least 1 −δ, where βn(δ) is given by Lemma 5, where ι(x) = 1
denotes the unit constant function, vn(q) := Ex∼q
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
, and ¯qn := p∗
u+qn
2
.
Proof of Theorem 1. Fix any m ∈Hk and n ∈N, the approximation error can then be decomposed
as:
|⟨m, g∗⟩k −⟨m, gθn⟩k| ≤|⟨m, g∗−ˆgn⟩k| + |⟨m, gθn −ˆgn⟩k|.
(56)
Let ι ∈Hk denote the unit constant function, i.e., ι(x) = 1, for all x ∈X. The difference between
normalized functions is then such that:
|⟨m, g∗−ˆgn⟩k| =


m, ˜g∗−gn + ι

log
Z
egn dµ −log
Z
e˜g∗dµ

k

≤|⟨m, ˜g∗−gn⟩k| + |⟨m, ι⟩k|
log
Z
egn dµ −log
Z
e˜g∗dµ

(57)
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
We can apply Jensen’s inequality to show that the second term on the right-hand side of the inequality
is bounded by the expected pointwise error between gn and ˜g∗. To reduce notation clutter, let
q∗:= p∗
u = exp g∗and Eq [h] := Ex∼q [h(x)]. Indeed, therefore, we have that:
Eq∗[˜g∗−gn] = Eq∗

−log
egn
e˜g∗

≥−log Eq∗
egn
e˜g∗

= −log

1
R
e˜g∗dµ
Z
e˜g∗egn
e˜g∗dµ

= log
Z
e˜g∗dµ −log
Z
egn dµ
(58)
by Jensen’s inequality on the convex −log(·). Similarly, repeating the same steps for Eˆqn [gn −˜g∗],
where ˆqn(x) = eˆgn(x) =
egn(x)
R
egn dµ, we get:
Eˆqn [gn −˜g∗] ≥log
Z
egn dµ −log
Z
e˜g∗dµ.
(59)
Combining the two inequalities yields:
log
Z
egn dµ −log
Z
e˜g∗dµ
 ≤max{Eq∗[˜g∗−gn] , Eˆqn [gn −˜g∗]}
≤|Eq∗[˜g∗−gn] | + |Eˆqn [gn −˜g∗] |.
(60)
We can now bound the expectations as:
∀q ∈P(X),
|Eq [˜g∗−gn] | = |Ex∼q [˜g∗(x) −gn(x)] |
= |Ex∼q [⟨˜g∗−gn, ϕ(x)⟩k] |
= |⟨˜g∗−gn, Ex∼q [ϕ(x)]⟩k|
≤βn(δ)∥Eq [ϕ(x)]∥H−1
n
≤βn(δ)Eq
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
.
(61)
where the first inequality follows by Lemma 5 and the second is due to Jensen’s. Therefore,
log
Z
egn dµ −log
Z
e˜g∗dµ
 ≤βn(δ)

Eq∗
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
+ Eˆqn
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
.
(62)
Finally, applying the bound above to Equation 57 followed by another application of Lemma 5, we
obtain:
|⟨m, g∗−ˆgn⟩k| ≤βn(δ)

∥m∥H−1
n
+ |⟨m, ι⟩k|

Eq∗
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
+ Eˆqn
h
∥ϕ(x)∥H−1
n
i
. (63)
For the remaining term in Equation 56, we have that:
|⟨m, gθn⟩k −⟨m, ˆgn⟩k| ≤∥m∥H−1
n ∥gθn −ˆgn∥Hn
≤∥m∥H−1
n
p
2(Ln(gθn) −Ln(ˆgn)),
(64)
which follows from Lemma 1. From Assumption A5, we have that:
∀∆> 0,
∃θ∆∈Θ :
∥gθ∆−ˆgn∥k ≤∆.
(65)
At the optimum, we know that Ln(gθn) ≤Ln(gθ), for all θ ∈Θ. Therefore, as ∆→0, by
continuity, we have that:
Ln(gθn) −Ln(ˆgn) ≤Ln(gθ∆) −Ln(ˆgn) →0,
(66)
which implies |⟨m, gθn⟩k −⟨m, ˆgn⟩k| →0 in Equation 64. Consequently, the density of the model
class allows us to replace pointwise evaluations ˆgn(x) = ⟨ˆgn, ϕ(x)⟩k by gθn(x), for x ∈X, so that
we can swap ˆqn in Equation 63 for qn(x) = exp gθn(x). The main result then follows.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Despite the model being potentially non-linear and the loss not being required to be least-squares,
Theorem 1 shows that we recover the same kind of RKHS-based error bound found in the kernel-
ized bandits literature (Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017; Durand et al., 2018; Oliveira et al., 2021).
Regarding the asymptotic rates, we make the following observations.
Remark 4. For a finite domain, |X| < ∞, the RKHS becomes finite dimensional with dim(Hk) =
|X|, resembling a linear model. In this case, Srinivas et al. (2010) provides bounds for the Gram
matrix log-determinant in βn(δ) as O(|X| log n), yielding:
βn(δ) ∈O(
p
|X| log n).
Predictive variance.
We can show a connection between ∥m∥H−1
n
and a GP predictive variance.
By an application of Woodbury’s identity, letting c
αℓ:= αℓbw, we have that:
∥m∥2
H−1
n
= mT(λnI + c
αℓMnM T
n )−1m
= mT(λ−1
n I −λ−2
n Mn(c
αℓ
−1I + λ−1
n M T
n Mn)−1M T
n )m
= λ−1
n mT(I −Mn(λnc
αℓ
−1I + M T
n Mn)−1M T
n )m
= λ−1
n (∥m∥2
k −mTMn(λnc
αℓ
−1I + M T
n Mn)−1M T
n m) ,
(67)
If observations correspond to pointwise evaluations m := k(·, x) = ϕ(x) and mi := k(·, xi) =
ϕ(xi), for x ∈X and {xi}n
i=1 ⊂X, we end up with:
∥m∥2
H−1
n
= ∥ϕ(x)∥2
H−1
n
= λ−1
n (k(x, x) −kn(x)T(λnc
αℓ
−1I + Kn)−1kn(x))
= λ−1
n σ2
n(x) ,
(68)
which corresponds to a scaled version of the posterior predictive variance σ2
n(x) of a GP (25). More-
over, the ⟨m, ι⟩k term in Theorem 1 is simply ⟨ϕ(x), ι⟩k = ι(x) = 1, for x ∈X, and the remaining
terms depend on expectations of ∥ϕ∥H−1
n , which is also a function of the predictive variance σ2
n(x).
We can then apply the auxiliary result from VSD (Lemma 4) to show that σ2
n(x) is O(n−1) asymp-
totically, whenever qθn(x) has a positive lower bound, allowing for asymptotic convergence of the
proposal distributions to the target p∗
u = exp g∗. As a result, considering Remark 4, we get:
|g∗(x) −gn(x)| ∈O
 r
|X| log n
n
!
,
(69)
which vanishes as n →∞. Therefore, the model converges to the target distribution p∗
u under these
assumptions. Nevertheless, the algorithm’s regret still depends on how fast the time-dependent
acquisition function at concentrates around the optimum x∗and how much probability mass qt
places away from x∗per BO round t, analyses which we leave as subject of future work.
B.5
LOSS FUNCTIONS
In the following, we present further details on the derivation of the loss functions. We consider
a fixed non-negative utility function u : R →[0, ∞) and the corresponding acquisition function
a : X →R defined as a(x) = E[u(y)|x], where the expectation is over the observations distribution.
Forward KL.
Expanding the definition, we have:
DKL(p∗
u||q) = Ex∼p∗u[log p∗
u(x) −log q(x)]
= Ex∼p∗u[log p∗
u(x)] −Ex∼p∗u[log q(x)]
= −H[p∗
u] −Ex∼p∗u[log q(x)].
(70)
Note that the entropy H[p∗
u] of the target is constant. Using importance sampling with a proposal q0,
the remaining expectation can be approximated as:
Ex∼p∗u[log q(x)] = Ex∼q0
p∗
u(x)
q0(x) log q(x)

≈1
B
B
X
i=1
p∗
u(xi)
q0(xi) log q(xi),
(71)
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
for a batch of B ≥1 samples xi ∼q0 sampled i.i.d. from the proposal q0. Having t ≥1 proposals,
instead, we get:
Ex∼p∗u[log q(x)] ≈1
tB
t
X
j=1
B
X
i=1
p∗
u(xj,i)
qj−1(xj,i) log q(xj,i),
(72)
where {xj,i}B
i=1
i.i.d.
∼
qj−1, for j ∈{1, . . . , t}.
We do not have access to the full p∗
u(x) =
a(x)p0(x)
R
X a(x′)p0(x′) dµ(x′) due to the intractability of the normalization factor2 R
X a(x′)p0(x′) dµ(x′) nor
the full acquisition function a(x) = E[u(y)|x], as we only observe noisy utilities u(yi). The nor-
malization factor, however, is constant, and the acquisition function can be unbiasedly approximated
via Monte Carlo. Using single-sample estimates for the latter, we then obtain our final form:
Ex∼p∗u[log q(x)] ≈1
tB
t
X
j=1
B
X
i=1
p0(xj,i)u(yj,i)
qj−1(xj,i)
log q(xj,i) = 1
nt
nt
X
i=1
p0(xi)u(yi)
qi−1(xi)
log q(xi), (73)
where the latter follows by simple re-indexing, with nt := tB. We can also drop the constant
1
nt
during optimization.
Balanced forward KL.
The balanced forward KL arises from the definition of Bregman diver-
gences:
D(p||q) = Ψ(p) −Ψ(q) −⟨∇Ψ(q), p −q⟩,
p, q ∈Ω,
(74)
where Ψ : Ω→R is a convex function over a convex subset Ωof a vector space. In our case, Ω
is the space P(X) of probability measures over the domain X, which can be embedded as convex
subset of L2(µ) when restricted to measures that have a square-integrable density with respect to
the base measure µ. Now consider the negative entropy functional:
Ψ(p) =
Z
X
p(x) log p(x) dµ(x).
(75)
Its functional gradient is given by:
∇Ψ(p) = 1 + log p.
(76)
Thus, the Bregman divergence with this functional is:
D(p||q) = Ψ(p) −Ψ(q) −⟨∇Ψ(q), p −q⟩
=
Z
X
p(x) log p(x) dµ(x) −
Z
X
q(x) log q(x) dµ(x) −⟨1 + log q, p −q⟩L2(µ)
=
Z
p log p dµ −
Z
q log q dµ −
Z
p −q dµ −
Z
(p −q) log q dµ
=
Z
p(log p −log q) dµ −
Z
p dµ +
Z
q dµ.
(77)
We could cancel the constants
R
p dµ =
R
q dµ = 1. Instead, we keep the term
R
q dµ, which after
an importance sampling approximation, allows us to have a non-banishing term for observations
where u(y) = 0. Namely, using a proposal q0, we have that:
D(p∗
u||q) =
Z
q0
p∗
u
q0
(log p∗
u −log q) dµ +
Z
q0
q
q0
dµ −
Z
p∗
u dµ
= −
Z
q0
p∗
u
q0
log q dµ +
Z
q0
q
q0
dµ + c,
(78)
where c :=
R
q0
p∗
u
q0 log p∗
u dµ −
R
p∗
u dµ is constant. Dropping constants and following a similar
approach to the derivation of the forward KL loss, we get:
−
Z
p∗
u log q dµ +
Z
q dµ ≈−
nt
X
i=1
p0(xi)u(yi)
qi−1(xi)
log q(xi) −
q(xi)
qi−1(xi),
t ≥1.
(79)
2Recall that µ represents a base measure of the domain with respect to which the proposal densities are
defined, i.e., the counting measure for a discrete domain (our experiments) or the Lebesgue measure for a
continuous domain.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAIL
This section presents algorithmic settings and implementation details for our experiments. We also
present a summary of our experimental results in Section C.4 and ablation studies in Section C.5. In
addition to the descriptions in this section, code for our experiments is available online at:
https://github.com/csiro-funml/generativebo
C.1
TEXT OPTIMIZATION
We use the same annealing threshold scheme for setting τt as Steinberg et al. (2025, Eqn. 20), where
we set η such that we begin at p0 = 0.5 we end at pT = 0.99. For the proposal distribution, we
found these short sequences best generated by the simple mean-field categorical model,
q(x|ϕ) =
M
Y
m=1
Categ(xm|softmax(ϕm))
(80)
where xm ∈V and ϕm ∈R|V|, and we directly optimize ϕ. VSD and CbAS use the simple MLP
classifier guide in Figure 4.
Sequential(
Embedding(
num_embeddings=A,
embedding_dim=16
),
Dropout(p=0.1),
Flatten(),
LeakyReLU(),
Linear(
in_features=16 * M,
out_features=64
),
LeakyReLU(),
Linear(
in_features=64,
out_features=1
),
)
(a) MLP architecture
Sequential(
Embedding(
num_embeddings=A,
embedding_dim=E
),
Dropout(p=0.2),
Conv1d(
in_channels=E,
out_channels=C,
kernel_size=Kc,
),
LeakyReLU(),
MaxPool1d(
kernel_size=Kx,
stride=Sx,
),
Conv1d(
in_channels=C,
out_channels=C,
kernel_size=Kc,
),
LeakyReLU(),
MaxPool1d(
kernel_size=Kx,
stride=Sx,
),
Flatten(),
LazyLinear(
out_features=H
),
LeakyReLU(),
Linear(
in_features=H,
out_features=1
),
)
(b) CNN architecture
Figure 4: Classifier architectures used for VSD and CbAS in the experiments using PyTorch syntax.
A = |V|, M = M, and we give all other parameters in Table 2 if not directly indicated.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C.2
PROTEIN DESIGN
We use the same threshold function and setting for all of the protein design experiments as in Sec-
tion C.1. However, these tasks require a more sophisticated generative model that can capture local
and global relationships that relate to a protein’s 3D structure. For this we use the auto-regressive
(causal) transformer architecture also used in Steinberg et al. (2025),
q(x|ϕ) = Categ(x1|softmax(ϕ1))
M
Y
m=2
q(xm|x1:m−1, ϕ1:m),
where
q(xm|x1:m−1, ϕ1:m) = Categ(xm|DTransformer(x1:m−1, ϕ1:m)).
(81)
For the latter, see Algorithm 10 and 14 in Phuong & Hutter (2022) for maximum likelihood training
and sampling implementation details, respectively. We give the architectural configuration for the
transformers in each task in Table 1, and the classifier CNN used by VSD and CbAS is in Figure 4.
Configuration
Stability
SASA
Ehrlich 15
Ehrlich 32
Ehrlich 64
Layers
2
2
2
2
2
Feedforward network
256
256
32
64
128
Attention heads
4
4
1
2
3
Embedding size
64
64
10
20
30
Table 1: Transformer backbone configuration.
Configuration
Stability
SASA
Ehrlich 15
Ehrlich 32
Ehrlich 64
E
16
16
10
10
10
C
96
96
16
16
16
Kc
7
7
4
7
7
Kx
5
5
2
2
2
Sx
4
4
2
2
2
H
192
192
128
128
128
Table 2: CNN guide configuration for VSD and CbAS
We use the following Ehrlich function configurations:
M = 15: motif length = 4, no. motifs = 2, quantization = 4
M = 32: motif length = 4, no. motifs = 2, quantization = 4
M = 64: motif length = 4, no. motifs = 8, quantization = 4
C.3
GENBO SETTINGS
Table 3 presents our settings for the different GenBO variants across experiments. The settings
for our proposal models followed VSD’s configurations. Our regularization scheme penalized the
Euclidean distance between the model’s parameters and their random initialization (He et al., 2015)
with Rn(θ) := λn∥θ −θ0∥2
2, using an annealed regularization factor λn := λ0 log2 n, similar to
Dai et al. (2022), which ensures enough exploration, while still λn
n →0 as n →∞, allowing for
convergence to the optimal θ∗. For threshold-based utilities, we mainly set the quantile threshold τt
to follow an annealing schedule ranging from the 50th (i.e., the median) to the 99th percentile of the
observations marginal distribution for both GenBO and VSD, where the percentile γt corresponding
the quantile is updated as γt := γη
t−1, where η :=

log γT
log γ0

1
T −1 ∈(0, 1).
C.4
RESULTS SUMMARY
Besides the plots in section 6, we summarize the final results in Table 4 and 5.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Acronym
Meaning
EI
Expected Improvement
PI
Probability of Improvement
sEI
Soft Expected Improvement, i.e., softplus(y −τ)
fKL
Forward KL loss
bfKL
Balanced forward KL loss
rPL
Robust preference loss
MF
Mean-field categorical proposal model
Tfm
Transformer proposal model
fr
More frequent regularization (change in λn schedule rate)
r0p10
Base regularization factor set to λ0 := 0.1
exp
Exponential regularizer, i.e., Rn(θ) := λn exp∥θ −θ0∥2
2
np
No (informative) prior, i.e., p0(x) ∝1
p
Pre-trained prior, learned from initial (randomly initialized) data D0
lg
Importance weights
lr0p10
Learning rate setting for training the generative model (e.g., 0.1 in this case)
pcmin0p50
Minimum percentile for threshold τt annealing schedule (e.g., 50% in this case)
pcmax0p90
Maximum percentile for threshold τt annealing schedule (e.g., 90% in this case)
Table 3: GenBO experiment settings acronyms
ALOHA
Ehrlich-15
Ehrlich-32
Ehrlich-64
Random mut.
3.80 ± 0.40
LaMBO-2
0.19 ± 0.17
0.36 ± 0.15
0.95 ± 0.02
CbAS
2.20 ± 0.40
0.57 ± 0.12
0.61 ± 0.10
0.98 ± 0.01
GA
0.45 ± 0.12
0.61 ± 0.10
0.98 ± 0.01
VSD
0.00 ± 0.00
0.19 ± 0.17
0.32 ± 0.09
0.97 ± 0.00
GenBO
0.20 ± 0.40
0.00 ± 0.00
0.28 ± 0.16
0.94 ± 0.02
Table 4: Final average regret (lower is better) for the best-performing variant of each method across
the ALOHA (text optimization) and Ehrlich benchmarks
C.5
ABLATIONS
We performed ablation studies on the annealing scheme and the evaluations batch size. We vary the
minimum and maximum percentile for the threshold annealing settings of both GenBO (with PI util-
ity) and VSD on the text optimization problem in Figure 5. Plots reveal a preference towards a more
exploitative behavior for this simpler optimization problem. In Figure 6, we vary the evaluations
batch size B for GenBO on the Ehrlich benchmark problem of sequence length 32. As expected,
larger evaluation batches lead to lower regret, though with higher variability across the candidates.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
FoldX (Stability)
FoldX (SASA)
Random mut.
2.79 ± 0.22
12550.26 ± 56.34
LaMBO-2
3.19 ± 0.58
12456.10 ± 126.64
CbAS
3.65 ± 0.23
12376.65 ± 298.30
VSD
4.20 ± 0.42
12537.97 ± 186.35
GenBO
3.28 ± 0.35
13285.42 ± 221.60
Table 5: FoldX average maximum outcome for the best-performing variant of each method
Method
Average Runtime
CbAS
53.38 s ± 2.05 s
VSD
42.89 s ± 2.56 s
GenBO
14.88 s ± 0.26 s
Table 6: Average run times with standard deviations for the ALOHA text optimization problem.
(a) GenBO
(b) VSD
Figure 5: Final average simple regret (the lower the better) for GenBO and VSD as a function of the
minimum and maximum percentile in the annealing schedule for the text optimization problem.
Figure 6: Batch evaluation size B ablation on Ehrlich benchmark of length 32. The plot presents
the final average simple regret for each B setting, with error bars corresponding to ±1 standard
deviation. All variants were run for the same number of BO rounds as in the original experiment.
27