--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
TOWARDS
KNOWLEDGE-AND-DATA-DRIVEN
OR-
GANIC REACTION PREDICTION:
RAG-ENHANCED
AND REASONING-POWERED HYBRID SYSTEM WITH
LLMS
Qingyu Wang1,2∗
Xinyuan Cai1∗
Xiang Cheng1
Yuzhe Gao1,2
Bo Xu1†
1 The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
ABSTRACT
In organic reaction prediction, many recent approaches ranging from tradi-
tional task-specific models to Large Language Models (LLMs), have demon-
strated notable success. However, these methods are inherently data-driven, ex-
hibit constrained interpretability, and have hit fundamental performance bottle-
necks.
To overcome these limitations, we present Reaction-Thinker, a hy-
brid, knowledge-and-data-driven system that is enhanced by Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) and powered by advanced reasoning, improving both the inter-
pretability of prediction process and the explainability of results. We develop
a similar-case retrieval database and train a RAG-based LLM through supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) to apply both reaction types and similar reaction cases as knowl-
edge. We also construct a reaction reasoning chain-of-thought (CoT) dataset and
train a reasoning-based LLM through SFT, then further optimize it using Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO). Experimental results show that our method
outperforms all compared LLMs and task-specific models, achieving the highest
accuracy (Exact Match) and fingerprint similarity (FTS). Ablation study indicates
improvements in relative accuracy of 7.5% and 13.9% for RAG and GRPO, re-
spectively. Further analysis of mispredictions reveals limitations in conventional
evaluation metrics, which motivates our proposed benchmarking refinement.
1
INTRODUCTION
In organic chemistry, predicting reaction outcomes has long been a core challenge. Traditionally,
expert chemists relied on years of hands-on experience and well-established principles to design
experiments and anticipate products. Today, artificial intelligence offers a powerful augment to this
approach, enhancing the efficiency and precision of prediction.
Current approaches to predicting organic reaction outcomes can be mainly categorized into template-
based and template-free methods. Template-based methods integrate machine learning with prede-
fined structural transformation rules, also known as reaction templates, either curated by experts
or extracted from atom-mapped datasets (Chen & Jung, 2022; Sacha et al., 2021). In contrast,
template-free methods employ data-driven architectures, such as graph neural networks (GNNs) or
Transformer-based sequence models, to infer reaction patterns directly from large reaction corpora
without relying on explicit templates. (Schwaller et al., 2018; Irwin et al., 2022). Recent advances
in large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant attention (Achiam et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). By undergoing large-scale pre-training followed
by fine-tuning or instruction tuning, these models acquire extensive knowledge, proficiently follow
instructions, and exhibit strong reasoning abilities. As a result, LLMs now achieve state-of-the-art
∗These authors contributed equally.
†Corresponding author. Email: xubo@ia.ac.cn
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(SOTA) performance comparable to or even exceeding that of humans, in general Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks such as language understanding and question answering, as well as special-
ized applications including mathematical problem-solving and code generation. Hence, a natural
idea is to explore whether LLMs can replicate the cognitive processes of expert chemists, enabling
more accurate reaction predictions.
Human chemists predict organic reactions through a multi-step cognitive process. Initially, they an-
alyze molecular structures, identifying functional groups, bond connectivity, stereochemistry, and
reactive sites, which are fundamental to mechanistic analysis (Smith, 2023). Then, they apply core
principles to hypothesize bond cleavage and formation. They propose reaction pathways and eluci-
date mechanistic steps, including identifying reaction centers, considering mechanisms such as SN1,
SN2, or pericyclic, and evaluating thermodynamic and kinetic feasibility (Levy, 2017). Finally, they
integrate insights to predict the main product and account for side reactions. Apart from that, known
reaction cases are also frequently referenced to inform predictions.
Recent works have applied LLMs to chemistry, particularly targeting organic reactions prediction.
Notable examples include the ChemDFM series (Zhao et al., 2024b;a), ChemLLM (Zhang et al.,
2024), ChemCrow (M. Bran et al., 2024), and Coscientist (Boiko et al., 2023). Some approaches
leverage large proprietary models such as GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) directly, exploiting their innate
zero-shot reasoning capabilities. Others build on open-source LLMs such as LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023) and fine-tune them on chemical literature and curated datasets, resulting in domain-specific
models with enhanced accuracy on chemical question answering (Q&A) and prediction tasks.
However, current fine-tuning methods for LLMs in chemistry primarily rely on data-driven strate-
gies, which are similar to traditional end-to-end deep learning approaches, and often fail to fully
leverage the rich chemical knowledge embedded in the pre-trained parameters of LLMs, and fine-
tuned models tend to underutilize their robust reasoning and in-context learning capabilities. Con-
sequently, the predictions often lack interpretability and do not outperform established task-specific
methods in accuracy. Although LLMs hold immense promise for organic reaction prediction, owing
to their pre-trained chemical knowledge as well as robust in-context learning and reasoning capabil-
ities, two critical bottlenecks must still be addressed before this potential can be fully realized.
First, high-quality, structured training data is severely scarce in chemistry. Domains like mathemat-
ics benefit from extensive open-source communities (e.g., Lean Community) and web-scale datasets,
whereas chemistry lacks publicly available resources for reaction reasoning. As a result, models un-
dergo pre-training and fine-tuning with limited exposure to task-relevant chemical data, hindering
their ability to develop advanced capabilities for complex reaction prediction tasks. Furthermore,
creating large-scale, annotated chemical datasets is a time-consuming and labor-intensive process
that demands substantial domain expertise.
Second, learning strategies for chemistry LLMs remain underdeveloped. Most existing chemical
LLM frameworks rely on standard pre-training followed by supervised fine-tuning (SFT), which
often fails to unlock the full potential of these models. Recent research highlights two advanced
techniques, including Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Ke et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025),
which can inject domain-specific knowledge as well as mitigating hallucinations, and reinforcement
learning (RL) (Guo et al., 2025), which can enhance reasoning and interpretability. However, their
adoption in chemical LLMs remains limited. Therefore, developing a hybrid learning framework
that integrates SFT, RAG and RL, combining both data-driven and knowledge-driven paradigms,
represents a promising direction for achieving interpretable, high-performance prediction.
In this paper, we propose Reaction-Thinker, a hybrid knowledge-and-data-driven organic reaction
prediction system, comprising both a RAG-based predictor and a reasoning-based predictor. The
main contributions of our work can be concluded in the following parts.
• We categorize reactions based on the given reaction inputs, define a standardized similar-
ity metric, and construct similar-case retrieval database for each type. Training and test
samples are partitioned based on whether similar retrieved cases exist, and each subset is
processed through a dedicated, specialized pipeline.
• For samples with similar cases retrieved, we inject reaction type and case-specific knowl-
edge into user prompt and curate a customized SFT dataset for a RAG-based LLM. This
enhances the ability of the LLM to retrieve domain-specific contextual information.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• For samples lacking similar reaction cases, we introduce a multi-stage reasoning enhance-
ment pipeline. First, we construct a chain-of-thought (CoT) dataset for organic reaction
reasoning.
Then, we employ SFT as a cold-start to establish an initial foundation of
high-accuracy CoT reasoning. Finally, we refine the deductive reasoning using reinforce-
ment learning through Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO).
• The system outperforms all compared LLMs and even exceeds traditional task-specific
models, in both accuracy (Exact Match) and fingerprint similarity performance (FTS). The
ablation study indicates improvements in relative accuracy of 7.5% and 13.9% for RAG
and GRPO, respectively.
• A detailed error analysis reveals that some incorrect predictions correspond to chemically
plausible byproducts or alternative reaction pathways, despite not matching the canonical
ground truth. To better account for such chemically plausible outcomes, we propose a
novel evaluation paradigm by incorporating retrosynthetic validation. Notably, our analysis
indicates that 47.8% of these incorrect predictions are chemically reasonable.
2
METHODS
As illustrated in Figure 1, our proposed organic reaction predict system integrates four core modules:
(1) a reaction type classifier, (2) a similar-case retrieval database, (3) a RAG-based reaction predictor,
and (4) a reasoning-based reaction predictor. Given a set of reaction inputs including reactants,
solvent, and reagents, the system first applies the classifier to determine the most probable reaction
type. Based on the predicted type, it queries the similar-case retrieval database for analogous reaction
examples. If similar reaction cases are found, they are then incorporated alongside the user prompt
into the RAG-based predictor; otherwise, the reaction inputs are routed directly to the reasoning-
based reaction predictor for CoT-based analysis. Depending on the pathway, either RAG-enhanced
or reasoning-based module generates the final reaction outcome.
Figure 1: The system architecture, training process, and inference pipeline of Reaction-Thinker.
Subsequent sections detail the training process of reaction type classifier, the construction and usage
of the similar-case retrieval database, the preparation of a CoT dataset for organic reaction reasoning,
and the training strategies for both RAG-based and reasoning-based predictors.
2.1
REACTION TYPE CLASSIFIER
We implement a two-layer MLP as the classifier. The original reaction inputs, provided as SMILES
strings, are processed with RDKit (Landrum, 2016) to compute multiple structural fingerprints.
These fingerprints (Mol-Fingerprint) are then concatenated and fed into the MLP to predict reac-
tion type (Classifier-Out).
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Inspired by previous work (Safizadeh et al., 2021), we employ a combination of various molecu-
lar fingerprint methods to comprehensively capture molecular information, including RDK (suitable
for general molecular similarity searches) (Schneider et al., 2015b), LAYERED (useful for substruc-
ture screening) (RDKit-Book, 2025), PATTERN (focused on identifying specific chemical features)
(RDKit-Book, 2025), AVALON (effective for both substructure screening and similarity matching
in complex molecules) (Gedeck et al., 2006), and MORGAN fingerprints (especially suitable for
cyclic substructure and comparing structural features) (Rogers & Hahn, 2010).
We train the reaction type classifier on the Schneider-50K dataset (Schneider et al., 2015a), which
contains 50K reaction SMILES classified into 50 representative types, providing granularity well-
suited for robust classification. After training, we extract the first layer output of the classifier as a
compact representation of the reaction inputs, providing a molecular embedding (Rea-Embedding)
of the reaction. The architecture of the reaction type classifier is described in Equation (1):
Rea-Embedding = Layer1 (Mol-Fingerprint)
Classifier-Out = Layer2 (Rea-Embedding)
(1)
2.2
SIMILAR-CASE RETRIEVAL DATABASE FOR RAG
For each reaction in both training and test splits of Open Reaction Dataset (ORD) (Kearnes et al.,
2021), we feed its reaction inputs (including reactants, solvents, and reagents, all formatted as
SMILES) into our trained reaction type classifier. This yields two outputs: (1) a molecular em-
bedding from the first layer, and (2) a predicted reaction type.
Using the ORD training set, we construct a similar-case retrieval library for each reaction type
by computing the Euclidean distance (L2 norm) between the molecular embedding of each query
reaction and that of all other embeddings of the same type. Any training sample with an embedding
distance smaller than M is considered similar, and its full reaction SMILES (including reactants,
solvents, reagents, and products) will be added to the retrieval library for that type.
Based on this, we build a SFT dataset for RAG-based LLM, containing only reactions that success-
fully retrieve at least one similar case. Each SFT sample includes the reaction inputs, its predicted
reaction type, the retrieved similar cases, and the target products.
During inference, we apply the same embedding and classification process to reaction inputs from
the test set. If the system retrieves one or more training cases within distance M, it follows the RAG
pathway; otherwise, it proceeds to the reasoning pathway without external context.
2.3
COT DATASET FOR REACTION REASONING
Figure 2: An example of chain-of-thought dataset for reasoning, including system prompt, user
prompt, and supervised output.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Here a two-stage approach is adopted to generate CoT data for reaction reasoning, involving both the
USPTO-MIT (Jin et al., 2017) and ORD. Finally, we merge CoT samples obtained from both stages
into a unified dataset, serving as the primary CoT resource for this work. The data are open-sourced
(refer to link and details in Appendix).
2.3.1
STAGE 1: PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION
Following the methodology in HK-O1aw (Lab, 2024), we extract reaction SMILES from a random
subset of the USPTO-MIT training set. We have carefully filtered the USPTO-MIT training data to
ensure that no reaction SMILES from it appears in the ORD test set, eliminating any risk of data
leakage during training and inference. These SMILES were processed using Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
(Qwen Team, 2024) with instructions to reconstruct the reaction mechanism through deductive rea-
soning, systematically deriving the products from the given reactants, solvents, and reagents through
a chain-of-thought reasoning process, even though the model has access to the final answer (refer
to Appendix for the prompt details). We then apply rigorous post-processing to refine the gener-
ated contexts, including format standardization and keyword-based validation, ultimately obtaining
119K high-quality CoT samples after careful filtering. An example of the dataset is shown in Fig-
ure 2. Although directly predicting reaction outcomes from conditions is challenging, our approach
leverages the observation that when provided with full reaction SMILES, LLMs can systematically
deduce the reaction pathway by analyzing the transformation from reactants to products.
2.3.2
STAGE 2: DISTILLATION AND VALIDATION
We first fine-tune DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B (DeepSeek-AI, 2025c) on the CoT samples gen-
erated from USPTO-MIT using SFT. Then, we further train the model on the ORD training set using
Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (see experimental results in Appendix). The GRPO
will be explained in detail in the following section. During this stage, only those generated reasoning
trajectories that lead to correct predicted products are retained. Overall, we collected 575K validated
CoT examples, covering approximately 55K unique samples from the original ORD dataset.
2.4
TRAINING STRATEGY OF RAG-BASED LLM
2.4.1
SUPERVISED FINE-TUNING
We fine-tune RAG-based LLM on the dataset constructed from similar-case retrieval database, using
SFT with full parameter updates. The Qwen3-32B (Qwen Team, 2025) is selected as the backbone
model for this process.
2.5
TRAINING STRATEGY OF REASONING-BASED LLM
We employ a two-stage training strategy (SFT followed by RL) for our reasoning-based LLM, using
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B (DeepSeek-AI, 2025b) as the backbone model due to its strong
reasoning performance compared to other LLMs of similar size.
2.5.1
SUPERVISED FINE-TUNING
First, we fine-tune the base model using SFT with full parameter updates on the generated CoT
dataset for reaction reasoning. Through this process, the model begins to internalize reasoning
patterns specific to organic reaction.
2.5.2
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Next, we perform RL with LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022) on the ORD training set to further
enhance reasoning accuracy as well as reliability.
Specifically, we use GRPO as the learning algorithm. Given an input query q ∼P(Q), GRPO
samples a group of G responses {y1, y2, . . . , yG} from the current policy πθold. The core idea is to
update the policy πθ by maximizing an objective function that encourages responses with higher-
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
than-average rewards within their group. The GRPO objective function is defined as follows:
J (θ) = Eq∼P (Q), {yi}G
i=1∼πθold(·|q)
"
1
G
G
X
i=1
1
|yi|
|yi|
X
t=1
min

ci,t(θ) ˆAi,t, clip (ci,t(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAi,t

−β DKL [πθ ∥πref]
#
(2)
where ϵ is the clipping ratio, β is the coefficient for KL-divergence loss, and πref is the reference
policy. ci,t(θ) is the importance sampling ratio for token yi,t (the t-th token of the i-th response yi):
ci,t(θ) = πθ(yi,t|q, yi,<t)
πθold(yi,t|q, yi,<t)
(3)
ˆAi,t is advantage estimate for all tokens in response yi and is calculated by normalizing the rewards
{r1, r2, . . . , rG} using the group mean and standard deviation:
ˆAi,t = ri −mean({r1, r2, . . . , rG})
std({r1, r2, . . . , rG})
(4)
2.5.3
REWARD FUNCTIONS
Here we design a custom reward function for RL, specifically tailored to organic reaction reasoning,
composed of four components:
• Format Reward: Assess whether the response format strictly follows the user instructions,
awarding 0.1 for correct compliance; or otherwise zero.
• Length Reward: Encourages concise reasoning, awarding 0.1 if the chain-of-thought
length falls within a predefined range (500 to 2000 tokens); or otherwise zero.
• Validity Reward: Assess the validity of the generated product SMILES, awarding 0.1 for
chemically valid; or otherwise zero.
• Accuracy Reward: Canonicalize the SMILES of generated product and compare it to the
ground truth. Award 2.0 if the two match exactly; or otherwise zero.
The final reward is calculated as the sum of these components. This composite reward structure
ensures that the model is incentivized to produce well-formed, appropriately concise, and chemically
accurate reasoning.
3
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first present a comprehensive comparative evaluation between our method and
existing baselines. Next, we evaluate the contribution of RAG. We also conduct an ablation study
to assess how variations in reward function design and the use of cold-start strategy affect GRPO
performance in this task. Finally, through detailed analysis of mispredictions, we identify critical
limitations in conventional evaluation metrics. Leveraging these insights, we propose a novel refer-
ence metric and present its evaluation result. Additional details are provided in Appendix.
3.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
3.1.1
DATASET AND METRICS
The raw Open Reaction Database (ORD) has been preprocessed by ORDerly (Wigh et al., 2024) and
split into 832K for training and 86K for testing. For evaluation, we employ various metrics includ-
ing Validity (whether the product SMILES can be successfully processed by RDKit), Exact Match
(after canonicalization) and molecular fingerprint similarity (FTS, including MORGAN, RDK, and
AVALON fingerprints). We deliberately avoid relying on text-based similarity metrics (e.g., BLEU
and Levenshtein), since they poorly reflect actual molecular differences, even a single alteration in
a SMILES string can correspond to a substantial change in the chemical structure.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.1.2
BASELINES
We compare our system with: (1) open-source LLMs including GPT-4o, DeepSeek-R1 (Guo
et al., 2025), DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B (DeepSeek-AI, 2025a), DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen
series (32B/14B/7B), and Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct; (2) chemical LLMs including ChemDFM-13B/8B
(OpenDFM Team, 2024) and Text-Chem-T5 (Christofidellis et al., 2023); and (3) traditional task-
specific models including Chemformer, which is reported to achieve the best Top-1 accuracy on
USPTO-MIT (Chen & Jung, 2022), and Molecular Transformer (Schwaller et al., 2019).
For open-source LLMs, we use the same user prompt template as our method, and for chemical
LLMs, we adopt the training prompts specified in the relevant papers.
3.2
MAIN RESULT
As shown in Table 1, our method outperforms all compared LLMs and traditional task-specific
models, achieving the highest Exact Match and fingerprint similarity (FTS).
Table 1: Comparison of our method with various baselines on the task of organic reaction prediction.
The results for Molecular Transformer are directly taken from existing work (Wigh et al., 2024). Due
to API cost constraints, the results for GPT-4o (marked †) are based on a randomly sampled subset
of 500 instances from the ORD test set. The top results are highlighted in bold.
Model
Model Type
Validity (%)
Exact Match (%)
FTS (%)
MORGAN
RDK
AVALON
Chemformer
Task-Specific Model
98.57
88.13
92.40
94.35
95.12
Molecular Transformer
99.66
85.84
–
–
–
GPT-4o †
General LLM
83.05 †
28.26 †
64.93 †
72.13 †
72.09 †
DeepSeek-R1
68.54
11.68
55.71
64.09
64.98
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
35.27
0.54
37.46
45.95
46.01
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B
66.42
7.20
49.06
59.17
59.67
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B
57.58
6.52
50.50
61.05
61.05
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B
43.72
1.69
32.72
40.92
40.95
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
47.74
1.21
43.50
54.58
53.77
ChemDFM-13B
Chemical LLM
98.29
52.41
77.27
82.03
82.15
ChemDFM-8B
97.80
48.02
74.69
79.85
80.02
Text-Chem-T5
95.67
47.88
76.45
81.81
81.81
Reaction-Thinker (Ours)
–
98.92
89.86
95.22
96.24
96.37
The final performance of our method is achieved through integration. In the test set, 81.7% of the
samples have similar reaction cases available. For these, our RAG-based approach achieves an Exact
Match of 94.70%. For the remaining 18.3% samples without similar cases, we apply reasoning-
based approach and achieve an Exact Match of 68.24%. Combining these two approaches yields
an overall accuracy of 89.86% across the entire test set. The FTS score is computed using the
same weighted approach, combining the RAG-based and reasoning-based results according to their
respective proportions.
3.3
ABLATION STUDY
3.3.1
CONTRIBUTION OF RAG
The effectiveness of RAG has been widely documented in recent works. By grounding generation
with retrieved context, it significantly reduces hallucinations and improves accuracy across many
domains. To verify the benefit of RAG for current task, we continue to use Qwen3-32B as the base
model and conduct a controlled comparison. Rather than following the conventional RAG setup that
retrieves reaction types and similar cases for prompt augmentation, we perform a direct end-to-end
supervised fine-tuning, mapping reaction input SMILES directly to product SMILES. As shown
in Table 2, using RAG yields better performance, with a relative accuracy improvement of 7.5%.
This matches chemical intuition: just as chemists reference analogous reactions, LLMs benefit from
RAG to improve prediction accuracy.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 2: Accuracy performance with and without RAG.
w/ RAG
w/o RAG (End-to-End)
Exact Match (%)
83.13
77.35
3.3.2
RAG ABLATION STUDY
We also explore how the embedding distance threshold M (which determines what reaction case
counts as similar, and is detailed in Section Similar-Case Retrieval Database for RAG) affects
both the proportion of queries having similar cases and the RAG pathway performance (in Table 3).
Table 3: Exact Match performance under different RAG thresholds.
M
Proportion with
similar cases (%)
RAG-based
Exact Match (%)
Reasoning-based
Exact Match (%)
Total Acc (%)
10
81.70
94.70
68.24
89.86
30
92.52
87.33
69.78
86.02
40
94.68
87.99
68.15
86.93
100
99.10
88.94
67.27
88.74
The results show that tight thresholds (e.g. M=10) yield high Exact Match (94.70%) but for fewer
queries, while looser thresholds increase coverage yet degrade accuracy. This highlights the need to
identify an optimal operating point. Ultimately, we selected M=10 in this work because it yields the
highest overall accuracy (Total Acc).
3.3.3
INFLUENCE OF GRPO
GRPO is an effective reinforcement learning framework for LLMs, where the design of reward
functions and selection of the base model critically determine its performance. To further explore
its application in current task, we conduct two controlled experiments.
1. Reward Function Ablation Study
Building on the baseline reward function (comprising format, length, validity, and accuracy re-
wards), we introduce a MORGAN fingerprint similarity reward (FTS reward, ranging from 0.0 to
1.0) in order to structurally align predictions with ground truths.
Steps
0         50      100      150      200      250      300
0        50      100      150      200     250      300
Training Reward
Validation Reward
Steps
1.8
1.4
1.6
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.2
0.6
w/o SFT
w/ SFT
w/ FTS Reward
w/ SFT
w/o FTS Reward
w/o FTS Reward
Figure 3: The reward curves under different combinations
of (i) whether SFT was applied before RL and (ii) whether
the FTS reward is introduced.
This modification aims to mitigate re-
ward sparsity by guiding the LLM
to generate outputs from structurally
similar to fully accurate. We record
the reward curves during training in
Figure 3 and evaluate the resulting
model with results presented in Ta-
ble 4.
The experiments reveal a
paradoxical phenomenon, while the
reward curve shows continuous im-
provement, the evaluation accuracy
actually declines. Through detailed
analysis, we identify that the fine-
tuned LLM tended to verbatim copy
reactant SMILES in outputs.
This
indicates a suboptimal optimization
strategy, since product and reactants
structures share chemical similarities,
directly copying reactants could still
achieve relatively high reward.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 4: Accuracy performance with and without fingerprint similarity reward in GRPO.
w/ FTS reward
w/o FTS reward
Exact Match (%)
56.83
68.24
To address this issue, we downweight the FTS reward and incorporate explicit penalties for reactant
copying. However, subsequent experiments demonstrate these measures are insufficient to com-
pletely prevent this behavior. This phenomenon exemplifies reward hacking, a well-documented RL
failure mode where agents optimize the proxy reward in unintended ways, achieving higher scores
while failing the true task objective. The tendency of LLM to cheat by exploiting structural corre-
lations between reactants and products remains a significant challenge, now recognized as a critical
focus for our ongoing optimization efforts.
2. Base Model Capability Analysis
To evaluate the impact of base model capability on GRPO performance, we conduct a controlled
experiment comparing two approaches: (1) direct application of GRPO to the initial DeepSeek-R1-
Distill-Qwen-32B, and (2) implementing GRPO following SFT on our reaction reasoning dataset.
The experimental results, including the reward curves in Figure 3 and final performance in Table 5,
reveal markedly different outcomes between the two settings. This underscores that proper initial-
ization through SFT is critical for unlocking the potential of GRPO in reaction reasoning tasks.
Table 5: Exact Match performance (%) under different SFT and GRPO settings. On the base model
with enhanced initial reasoning capabilities (w/ SFT), applying GRPO yields a relative accuracy
improvement of 13.9%.
w/o SFT
w/ SFT
w/o GRPO
6.52
59.93
w/ GRPO
9.67
68.24
3.4
ANALYSIS OF INCORRECT PREDICTIONS
Through systematic error analysis comparing LLM predictions with ground truth, we identified
two major failure modes: (1) complex reactions involving multiple functional groups or multi-step
processes, and (2) incomplete reaction conditions (e.g., missing temperature or catalysts, which is
confirmed by GPT-4o). Figure 4 presents an example of incorrect prediction along with detailed
analysis using GPT-4o and retrosynthetic validation.
Figure 4: Analysis of incorrect prediction using GPT-4o and retrosynthetic validation. The key reac-
tion conditions influencing final product are marked in bold red. Both products are valid candidate
answers in the absence of specific condition constraints.
Fundamentally, many organic reactions inherently generate byproducts via parallel or competing
pathways, yet existing datasets typically record only one to three major products. This exposes a
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
critical limitation in current evaluation metrics for reaction prediction tasks, where exclusive com-
parison to a single ground truth fails to reflect chemical reality and may hinder LLMs from devel-
oping a genuine understanding of organic reaction mechanisms.
To address this, we propose a novel evaluation paradigm by incorporating retrosynthetic validation.
For each product predicted by reasoning-based LLM, we verify whether a plausible retrosynthetic
route exists based on the given reaction inputs. If chemically reasonable, a prediction is deemed
correct even if it does not match the ground truth. Applying the retrosynthetic analysis tool Retro*
(Chen et al., 2020) to our previously mispredicted examples, 47.8% of them are validated as chemi-
cally reasonable, bringing the total fraction of reactions passing retrosynthesis validation to 92.64%.
Appendix reports experiments for the baseline models using the retrosynthetic validation method.
4
CONCLUSION
In this study, we introduce Reaction-Thinker, a hybrid, knowledge-and-data-driven system that
significantly advances organic reaction prediction by combining RAG-based LLM with reasoning-
based LLM. Experiments on ORD demonstrate that our system achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) re-
sults in Exact Match and fingerprint similarity, outperforming all compared LLMs and task-specific
models. The result shows the potential of leveraging LLMs for addressing fundamental challenges
in chemical research. We also identify several promising directions for future enhancement. For
example, the reasoning-based LLM still has significant room for improvement. The optimization of
reward functions will be our focus in further research to help LLMs have better understanding of
organic reaction mechanisms. Moreover, enhanced CoT datasets incorporating chemical synthesis
processes will be developed and integrated into current training framework, enabling more rigorous
analysis of how reaction condition variations affect outcomes. Last but not least, current system
implements RAG and reasoning as separate LLM modules, and future work will integrate these
capabilities into a unified architecture.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We have made the code and data publicly available to support reproducibility. The experimental
details and GitHub link can be found in Appendix.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences under Grant No. XDA0480303 and the National Science and Technology Major Project
under Grant No. 2023ZD0120901. The AI-driven experiments, simulations, and model training
were performed on the robotic AI-Scientist platform of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This research complies with the ICLR Code of Ethics. Our study uses publicly available benchmark
data and does not involve human subjects or collection of sensitive information. The authors declare
no potential conflicts of interest or sponsorship that could influence the work reported in this paper.
REFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical research
with large language models. Nature, 624(7992):570–578, 2023.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al.
Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022.
Binghong Chen, Chengtao Li, Hanjun Dai, and Le Song. Retro*: learning retrosynthetic planning
with neural guided a* search. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1608–1616.
PMLR, 2020.
Lun-Chi Chen, Mayuresh Sunil Pardeshi, Yi-Xiang Liao, and Kai-Chih Pai. Application of retrieval-
augmented generation for interactive industrial knowledge management via a large language
model. Computer Standards & Interfaces, 94:103995, 2025.
Shuan Chen and Yousung Jung. A generalized-template-based graph neural network for accurate
organic reactivity prediction. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(9):772–780, 2022.
Dimitrios Christofidellis, Giorgio Giannone, Jannis Born, Ole Winther, Teodoro Laino, and Matteo
Manica. Unifying molecular and textual representations via multi-task language modelling. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6140–6157. PMLR, 2023.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-llama-70b. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B, 2025a. Distilled Llama-3.3-70B model optimized
for reasoning.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-32b. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B, 2025b. Distilled Qwen2.5-32B model optimized for
reasoning.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-7b. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B,
2025c.
Distilled
reasoning
model
based
on
Qwen2.5-7B.
Carl Edwards, Chi Han, Gawon Lee, Thao Nguyen, Bowen Jin, Chetan Kumar Prasad, Sara
Szymku´c, Bartosz A Grzybowski, Ying Diao, Jiawei Han, et al. mclm: A function-infused and
synthesis-friendly modular chemical language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12565, 2025.
Hanyu Gao, Thomas J Struble, Connor W Coley, Yuran Wang, William H Green, and Klavs F
Jensen. Using machine learning to predict suitable conditions for organic reactions. ACS central
science, 4(11):1465–1476, 2018.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yixin Dai, Jiawei Sun,
Haofen Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2(1), 2023.
Peter Gedeck, Bernhard Rohde, and Christian Bartels. Qsar- how good is it in practice? compar-
ison of descriptor sets on an unbiased cross section of corporate data sets. Journal of chemical
information and modeling, 46(5):1924–1936, 2006.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Shailja Gupta, Rajesh Ranjan, and Surya Narayan Singh. A comprehensive survey of retrieval-
augmented generation (rag): Evolution, current landscape and future directions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.12837, 2024.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
PMLR, 2020.
Seung Hwan Hong, Seongok Ryu, Jaechang Lim, and Woo Youn Kim. Molecular generative model
based on an adversarially regularized autoencoder. Journal of chemical information and modeling,
60(1):29–36, 2019.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2):3, 2022.
Ross Irwin, Spyridon Dimitriadis, Jiazhen He, and Esben Jannik Bjerrum. Chemformer: a pre-
trained transformer for computational chemistry. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 3
(1):015022, 2022.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7969–7992, 2023.
Wengong Jin, Connor Coley, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Predicting organic reaction
outcomes with weisfeiler-lehman network. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017.
YuHe Ke, Liyuan Jin, Kabilan Elangovan, Hairil Rizal Abdullah, Nan Liu, Alex Tiong Heng Sia,
Chai Rick Soh, Joshua Yi Min Tung, Jasmine Chiat Ling Ong, and Daniel Shu Wei Ting. De-
velopment and testing of retrieval augmented generation in large language models–a case study
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01733, 2024.
Steven M Kearnes, Michael R Maser, Michael Wleklinski, Anton Kast, Abigail G Doyle, Spencer D
Dreher, Joel M Hawkins, Klavs F Jensen, and Connor W Coley. The open reaction database.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 143(45):18820–18826, 2021.
HKAIR Lab. Hk-o1aw models: Leveraging o1 slow thinking in the development of hong kong legal
large language models. https://github.com/HKAIR-Lab/HK-O1aw, 2024.
Greg Landrum. Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics software. https://www.rdkit.org,
2016. Version as of your usage date.
Daniel E Levy. Arrow-pushing in organic chemistry: an easy approach to understanding reaction
mechanisms. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
Junkai Li, Yunghwei Lai, Weitao Li, Jingyi Ren, Meng Zhang, Xinhui Kang, Siyu Wang, Peng
Li, Ya-Qin Zhang, Weizhi Ma, et al. Agent hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable
medical agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02957, 2024.
Xiaoxi Li, Guanting Dong, Jiajie Jin, Yuyao Zhang, Yujia Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Peitian Zhang, and
Zhicheng Dou. Search-o1: Agentic search-enhanced large reasoning models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.05366, 2025.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe
Schwaller. Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools. Nature Machine Intelli-
gence, 6(5):525–535, 2024.
OpenAI.
Gpt-4o:
Multilingual, multimodal foundation model.
https://openai.com/
index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Released May 2024 (real-time text, vision, and audio in-
ference).
OpenDFM Team.
Chemdfm-13b/8b.
https://github.com/OpenDFM/ChemDFM, 2024.
Open-source chemical LLM models.
MV Prakash, Ganesh Parab, Vishal Vaddina, Saisubramaniam Gopalakrishnan, et al. Synergistic fu-
sion of graph and transformer features for enhanced molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03027, 2023.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
2022.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yujie Qian, Zhening Li, Zhengkai Tu, Connor Coley, and Regina Barzilay. Predictive chemistry
augmented with text retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pp. 12731–12745, 2023.
Qwen
Team.
Qwen2.5-72b-instruct.
https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.
5-72B-Instruct, 2024. Instruction-tuned Qwen2.5 model.
Qwen Team. Qwen3-32b. https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-32B, 2025. Large
language model with RAG-friendly architecture.
RDKit-Book.
RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics.
https://www.rdkit.org/docs/
RDKit_Book.html, 2025. Accessed: 2025-08-01.
David Rogers and Mathew Hahn. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of chemical informa-
tion and modeling, 50(5):742–754, 2010.
Mikołaj Sacha, Mikołaj Błaz, Piotr Byrski, Paweł Dabrowski-Tumanski, Mikołaj Chrominski, Rafał
Loska, Paweł Włodarczyk-Pruszynski, and Stanisław Jastrzebski. Molecule edit graph attention
network: modeling chemical reactions as sequences of graph edits. Journal of Chemical Infor-
mation and Modeling, 61(7):3273–3284, 2021.
Hamid Safizadeh, Scott W Simpkins, Justin Nelson, Sheena C Li, Jeff S Piotrowski, Mami
Yoshimura, Yoko Yashiroda, Hiroyuki Hirano, Hiroyuki Osada, Minoru Yoshida, et al. Improving
measures of chemical structural similarity using machine learning on chemical–genetic interac-
tions. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 61(9):4156–4172, 2021.
Nadine Schneider, Daniel M Lowe, Roger A Sayle, and Gregory A Landrum. Development of a
novel fingerprint for chemical reactions and its application to large-scale reaction classification
and similarity. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 55(1):39–53, 2015a.
Nadine Schneider, Roger A Sayle, and Gregory A Landrum. Get your atoms in order-an open-source
implementation of a novel and robust molecular canonicalization algorithm. Journal of chemical
information and modeling, 55(10):2111–2120, 2015b.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Philippe Schwaller, Theophile Gaudin, David Lanyi, Costas Bekas, and Teodoro Laino. “found in
translation”: predicting outcomes of complex organic chemistry reactions using neural sequence-
to-sequence models. Chemical science, 9(28):6091–6098, 2018.
Philippe Schwaller, Teodoro Laino, Th´eophile Gaudin, Peter Bolgar, Christopher A Hunter, Costas
Bekas, and Alpha A Lee. Molecular transformer: a model for uncertainty-calibrated chemical
reaction prediction. ACS central science, 5(9):1572–1583, 2019.
Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Enhanc-
ing retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative retrieval-generation synergy. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.15294, 2023.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
David K Smith. Priority and selectivity rules to help students predict organic reaction mechanisms.
Journal of Chemical Education, 100(3):1164–1178, 2023.
Yuanbing Song, Jinghua Chen, Wenju Wang, Gang Chen, and Zhichong Ma. Double-head trans-
former neural network for molecular property prediction. Journal of Cheminformatics, 15(1):27,
2023.
Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer,
Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal under-
standing across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ee
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Interleaving re-
trieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10509, 2022.
Donghan Wang, Xu Dong, Xueyou Zhang, and LiHong Hu. Gadiff: a transferable graph atten-
tion diffusion model for generating molecular conformations. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 26(1):
bbae676, 2025a.
Yu Wang, Chao Pang, Yuzhe Wang, Yi Jiang, Junru Jin, Sirui Liang, Quan Zou, and Leyi Wei.
Mechretro is a chemical-mechanism-driven graph learning framework for interpretable retrosyn-
thesis prediction and pathway planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02630, 2022.
Zihan Wang, Kangjie Lin, Jianfeng Pei, and Luhua Lai. Reacon: a template-and cluster-based
framework for reaction condition prediction. Chemical Science, 16(2):854–866, 2025b.
Daniel S Wigh, Joe Arrowsmith, Alexander Pomberger, Kobi C Felton, and Alexei A Lapkin. Or-
derly: data sets and benchmarks for chemical reaction data. Journal of Chemical Information and
Modeling, 64(9):3790–3798, 2024.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8:229–256, 1992.
Nirmalie Wiratunga, Ramitha Abeyratne, Lasal Jayawardena, Kyle Martin, Stewart Massie,
Ikechukwu Nkisi-Orji, Ruvan Weerasinghe, Anne Liret, and Bruno Fleisch. Cbr-rag: case-based
reasoning for retrieval augmented generation in llms for legal question answering. In Interna-
tional Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, pp. 445–460. Springer, 2024.
Lin Yao, Wentao Guo, Zhen Wang, Shang Xiang, Wentan Liu, and Guolin Ke. Node-aligned graph-
to-graph: elevating template-free deep learning approaches in single-step retrosynthesis. JACS
Au, 4(3):992–1003, 2024.
Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian
Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system
at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
Di Zhang, Wei Liu, Qian Tan, Jingdan Chen, Hang Yan, Yuliang Yan, Jiatong Li, Weiran Huang,
Xiangyu Yue, Wanli Ouyang, et al. Chemllm: A chemical large language model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.06852, 2024.
Peng-Cheng Zhao, Xue-Xin Wei, Qiong Wang, Qi-Hao Wang, Jia-Ning Li, Jie Shang, Cheng Lu,
and Jian-Yu Shi. Single-step retrosynthesis prediction via multitask graph representation learning.
Nature Communications, 16(1):814, 2025a.
Zihan Zhao, Bo Chen, Jingpiao Li, Lu Chen, Liyang Wen, Pengyu Wang, Zichen Zhu, Danyang
Zhang, Yansi Li, Zhongyang Dai, et al. Chemdfm-x: towards large multimodal model for chem-
istry. Science China Information Sciences, 67(12):1–2, 2024a.
Zihan Zhao, Da Ma, Lu Chen, Liangtai Sun, Zihao Li, Hongshen Xu, Zichen Zhu, Su Zhu, Shuai
Fan, Guodong Shen, et al. Chemdfm: Dialogue foundation model for chemistry. arXiv e-prints,
pp. arXiv–2401, 2024b.
Zihan Zhao, Bo Chen, Ziping Wan, Lu Chen, Xuanze Lin, Shiyang Yu, Situo Zhang, Da Ma, Zichen
Zhu, Danyang Zhang, et al. Chemdfm-r: An chemical reasoner llm enhanced with atomized
chemical knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21990, 2025b.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
APPENDIX
A.1
RELATED WORK
A.1.1
RETRIEVAL-AUGMENTED GENERATION IN LLMS
RAG can be an effective paradigm for infusing LLMs with non-parametric knowledge (Gao et al.,
2023; Gupta et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), with demonstrated impact in knowledge-intensive domains
such as medicine (Li et al., 2024) and law (Wiratunga et al., 2024). By retrieving and conditioning on
external documents, RAG significantly improves performance on generation tasks. RAG methods
can be broadly categorized into single-round and multi-round strategies. Basic RAG approaches
typically retrieves knowledge based solely on the initial query (Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al.,
2022). Some works have also explored multi-round retrieval strategies that iteratively refine or
rewrite queries across steps (Shao et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023), interleave retrieval with reasoning
(Trivedi et al., 2022), or utilize multi-stage self-asking mechanisms (Press et al., 2022). Depending
on the task, either single-round or multi-round retrieval strategies can be employed.
A.1.2
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR COT REASONING
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning (Trivedi et al., 2022) represents a significant methodological
advancement in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. This approach prompts models to
explicitly generate intermediate reasoning steps before arriving at a final output. Such structured rea-
soning processes substantially improve prediction accuracy, as higher-quality intermediate contexts
often contribute to more reliable and consistent final results. Reinforcement learning (RL) has also
emerged as a powerful technique for improving the reasoning ability of LLMs, particularly in do-
mains such as mathematics, where structured reward signals allow models to learn beyond what SFT
alone can achieve. Recent developments have introduced RL frameworks with numerical feedback,
often relying on online policy optimization algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (Schul-
man et al., 2017), Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024), REINFORCE
(Williams, 1992), and Decoupled Clip and Dynamic Sampling Policy Optimization (DAPO) (Yu
et al., 2025).
A.1.3
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE APPLICATIONS IN CHEMISTRY
Artificial intelligence has found extensive application in the chemistry domain, using deep learning
to learn from large-scale data and thereby accelerating research in complex tasks. The key areas
include molecular design, property prediction, and reaction-related applications. In molecular de-
sign, the goal is to generate small molecules with desired properties while maintaining synthetic
accessibility. Current approaches commonly use language models (Edwards et al., 2025), autoen-
coders (Hong et al., 2019), and diffusion models (Wang et al., 2025a), which together enable flexible
and targeted compound generation. For molecular property prediction, the task involves forecast-
ing properties based on molecular structure. State-of-the-art methods largely rely on pre-trained
Transformer models (Song et al., 2023) and GNNs (Prakash et al., 2023).
In reaction-related tasks, forward reaction prediction aims to predict reaction outcomes from given
reactants and reagents. Traditional Task-specific models for predicting organic reaction outcomes
can be mainly categorized into template-based and template-free methods. Template-based methods
integrate machine learning with predefined structural transformation rules, also known as reaction
templates, either curated by experts or extracted from atom-mapped datasets (Chen & Jung, 2022;
Sacha et al., 2021). In contrast, template-free methods employ data-driven architectures, such as
graph neural networks (GNNs) or Transformer-based sequence models, to infer reaction patterns
directly from large reaction corpora without relying on explicit templates (Schwaller et al., 2018;
Irwin et al., 2022). LLM-based reaction predictors combine chemical text pretraining with Seq2Seq
supervised fine-tuning to generate product SMILES from reactant inputs (Christofidellis et al., 2023;
Zhao et al., 2024b). Recent advances further integrate reasoning modules to enhance mechanistic
fidelity and prediction accuracy (Zhao et al., 2025b). Retrosynthesis planning works in reverse
by deducing viable starting materials and intermediates to propose synthetic routes (Wang et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2025a; Yao et al., 2024). Meanwhile, reaction condition recommendation seeks
to suggest catalysts, solvents, and other reaction parameters for a given transformation (Gao et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2025b; Qian et al., 2023).
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A.2
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Code and data at https://github.com/GuliGuli-Boom/Reaction-Thinker.
A.2.1
CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT DATASET
Supplementary to Section CoT Dataset for Reaction Reasoning in the main text.
Data Generation Script
The data generation script and associated prompt template for Section Stage 1: Preliminary Con-
struction has been made publicly available in CoT-Gen.py and User-Prompt.txt, respectively.
The prompt first provides explicit high-level instructions, guiding the model to assume the role of
an expert chemist and to articulate the reaction reasoning process in a step-by-step manner.
Prompt Template
You are an expert-level AI chemist capable of explaining the reasoning process for chemical reactions
step by step.
You will be given a standardized chemical reaction equation, including reactants, reagents, and products.
Your task is to construct a reasoning dataset based on this equation.
For each reasoning step, provide a title describing what you did in that step and its content.
Requirements: Use 5-8 reasoning steps. Verify the given answer through different methods. Consider
potential alternative answers and explain why they are rejected. Contemplate the possibility of error: If
your reasoning is wrong, identify where the error could occur. Fully test all other possibilities where you
might be mistaken. When you say you are rechecking, genuinely recheck using another method instead
of merely stating that you are rechecking. Format your response in JSON. Each reasoning step should
include the following keys:
“Title”: A description of the current reasoning step.
“Content”: A detailed explanation of this step.
“Next-Action”: Either “continue” or “final answer”.
Subsequently, a concrete reaction example is included to demonstrate the expected reasoning struc-
ture and output format, enabling the LLM to imitate both the logical progression and the structured
JSON representation during data generation. The textual descriptions corresponding to the key re-
action mechanisms are highlighted in bold.
Reaction Reasoning Example
Reaction inputs:
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc(O[Si](C)(C)C(C)(C)C)cc3n2)cc1.[F-]
Reaction output:
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1
“Title”: Analyzing the given reactants and reagents
“Content”: The reactants and reagents include
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc(O[Si](C)(C)C(C)(C)C)cc3n2)cc1, a molecule with a central aromatic ring sub-
stituted with a pyridine moiety, and [F-], a fluoride ion.
“Next-Action”: “continue”
“Title”: Hypothesizing the possible reaction mechanism
“Content”: The reaction may involve the following reaction centers: The silicon atom in the silyl ether
group and its attached oxygen atom; The incoming fluoride ion interacts with the silicon. The reaction
describes the transformation of a silyl ether to a hydroxyl group. This process typically involves a
deprotection reaction where the silyl protecting group is removed, exposing the original alcohol.
Here, the fluorine ion acts as a nucleophile in the mechanism, which is common for desilylation reactions.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
“Next-Action”: continue
“Title”: Predicting possible reactions
“Content”: Here are the possible mechanistic steps of this reaction. Nucleophilic attack: The fluoride
ion attacks the silicon atom of the silyl ether. Silicon has a high affinity for fluorine due to its ability to
form strong Si-F bonds. Cleavage of Si-O bond: As the Si-F bond forms, the Si-O bond is weakened and
subsequently cleaved. This releases the Si group (usually as a volatile SiF compound), and the hydroxyl
group is restored. Reformation of hydroxyl group: With the removal of the silyloxy group, a hydrogen
from the solvent or environment can bond to the oxygen, completing the transformation to the hydroxyl
group.
“Next-Action”: continue
“Title”: Validating the reaction pathway
“Content”: Fluoride ion (F-) acts as a nucleophile and attacks the silicon atom in the TBDMS group.
Upon attack by fluoride, the silicon center forms a pentavalent transition state, which is relatively stable
because silicon can accommodate five bonds due to its size and electronic structure. This intermediate
is often depicted with a negatively charged fluoride attached to silicon, briefly forming a complex where
the oxygen-silicon bond is weakened. As the intermediate collapses, the Si-O bond between the silyl
group and the oxygen atom is cleaved, breaking the silyl ether linkage and releasing a free alcohol
(-OH). After the Si-O bond has been cleaved, the molecule is left with a free hydroxyl group (-OH)
in place of the silyl ether. The Si-F bond formation results in the formation of tert-butyldimethylsilyl
fluoride (TBSF) as a byproduct. TBSF is relatively stable and does not interfere with the reaction further.
“Next-Action”: continue
“Title”: Considering alternative possibilities
“Content”: The first possible reaction is that the fluoride ion could attack the electron-deficient aromatic
ring near the nitrogen atoms, potentially displacing a substituent in a nucleophilic aromatic substitution.
However, Nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) generally requires strong electron-withdrawing
groups ortho or para to the leaving group, which are not present in this molecule. Fluoride is more
likely to target the silicon atom in the silyl group due to silicon’s affinity for fluoride and the relatively
low activation energy required for Si-O bond cleavage. The second possible reaction is that the nucle-
ophilic fluoride could theoretically attack the methyl groups attached to the tertiary nitrogen, leading
to N-dealkylation and removing one or both methyl groups. However, N-dealkylation would typically
require a more electrophilic carbon (such as a benzylic or allylic carbon) or harsher conditions, such as
oxidation. In contrast, the silicon-fluoride interaction is very strong, making the silyl ether bond much
more susceptible to fluoride attack than the N-C bonds in the tertiary amine. Fluoride ions could, under
special conditions, participate in deprotonating an aromatic C-H bond or causing other activation of the
aromatic ring. However, Aromatic C-H activation is highly unlikely under these conditions and would
generally require a transition-metal catalyst and more stringent conditions. The Si-O bond in the silyl
ether is far more reactive toward fluoride under mild conditions. The last possible reaction could be a
fluoride-mediated deprotection of a tert-butyldimethylsilyl (TBDMS) group, restoring the free hydroxyl
(-OH) functionality in the aromatic compound. The high affinity between silicon and fluoride drives the
reaction forward. The formation of the strong Si-F bond makes the reaction favorable and specific for
silyl deprotection. The fluoride ion selectively attacks the silicon center due to its high electrophilicity,
leaving other functional groups (like the tertiary amine and aromatic rings) untouched.
“Next-Action”: continue
“Title”: Confirming the reasoning process
“Content”: After reasoning and validation,
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1 is confirmed to be the final product.
“Next-Action”: continue
“Title”: Final reasoning result
“Content”: Based on the above analysis, the reaction product is
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1. Instead of the silyl ether group, there is a hydroxyl (OH)
group.
“Next-Action”: final-answer
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Open-Source Samples
A curated subset of 100 randomly selected examples is provided in Open-Source.jsonl for demon-
stration purposes. The full dataset, consisting of 119K (from USPTO-MIT) and 575K (from ORD)
reaction reasoning samples, is available at our GitHub repository.
A.2.2
TRAINING DEEPSEEK-R1-DISTILL-QWEN-7B
Supplementary to Section Stage 2: Distillation and Validation of CoT Dataset for Reaction Rea-
soning in the main text. We document the experimental setting and training progress of DeepSeek-
R1-Distill-Qwen-7B during the CoT dataset construction process.
Experimental Settings and Results
The implementation details are specified in the scripts SFT-DeepSeek-7B.sh and GRPO-DeepSeek-
7B.sh. The experiments are run on 8 NVIDIA A800 GPUs.
We record the reward curves during GRPO in Figure 5. We also evaluate the final models after
SFT and GRPO, with detailed results presented in Table 6. This is a preliminary study to validate
the integration of LLMs and RL for organic reaction prediction. This pilot study, which also yields
a dataset of CoT reasoning traces, provides compelling evidence for the viability of our method.
However, anticipating the limitations of a 7B model, we proceed with a more powerful DeepSeek-
R1-Distill-Qwen-32B in the main experiment.
Figure 5: The reward curve during GRPO training for DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B.
Table 6: The Validity and Exact Match performance of DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B on the
USPTO-MIT test set after SFT and GRPO, respectively.
Validity (%)
Exact Match (%)
After SFT
86.4
22.4
After GRPO
91.9
35.9
A.2.3
TRAINING REACTION TYPE CLASSIFIER
Supplementary to Section Reaction Type Classifier.
Experimental Settings and Results
The training and test code, as well as parameter configurations are implemented in Classifier.py file.
We randomly shuffled the raw Schneider-50K dataset and split it into a 40K training set and a 10K
validation set. The final classifier achieves a Top-1 accuracy of 94.35% on the validation set.
A.2.4
TRAINING RAG-BASED LLM
Experimental Settings
The implementation details are specified in the script RAG-Qwen-32B.sh. All experiments are run
on 8 NVIDIA A800 GPUs.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A.2.5
TRAINING REASONING-BASED LLM
Experimental Settings
The SFT implementation details are specified in SFT-DeepSeek-32B-1.sh, SFT-DeepSeek-32B-
2.sh. The GRPO implementation details are specified in GRPO-DeepSeek-32B-1.sh and GRPO-
DeepSeek-32B-2.sh. All experiments are run on 16 NVIDIA A800 GPUs.
A.3
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
A.3.1
RETROSYNTHETIC VALIDATION
This is the supplementary to Section Analysis of Incorrect Predictions. We conduct additional
experiments for the baseline models using the new retrosynthetic validation method (in Table 7).
Retro Validity assesses whether a plausible retrosynthetic route exists based on the given reaction
input for products predicted by LLM. It is necessary to note that in our new experiment, Reaction-
Thinker records retrosynthesis validation for both Reasoning-based and RAG-based LLMs. As a
result, the score increases from 92.64% to 93.89%. These results demonstrate the superior Retro
Validity of our method.
Table 7: The results for GPT-4o (marked †) are based on a randomly sampled subset of 500 instances
from the ORD test set. The top results are highlighted in bold.
Model
Model Type
Retro Validity (%)
Chemformer
Task-Specific Model
92.91
GPT-4o †
General LLM
31.32 †
DeepSeek-R1
13.89
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
1.44
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B
8.22
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B
7.83
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B
1.98
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
1.90
ChemDFM-13B
Chemical LLM
58.60
ChemDFM-8B
57.48
Text-Chem-T5
53.56
Reaction-Thinker
–
93.89
A.3.2
RESULTS ON USPTO-MIT
We add the evaluation results on the USPTO-MIT test set (in Table 8). Here, we focus on evaluat-
ing task-specific models and chemical LLMs, and introduce LocalTransform (Chen & Jung, 2022)
(which also demonstrated excellent performance on the USPTO-MIT dataset) as a new baseline.
It is worth noting that approximately 65% of the USPTO-MIT test samples already appear in the
ORD training set. To ensure a fair comparison, we evaluated Reaction-Thinker in two settings, on
the full USPTO-MIT test set, and on a filtered version (marked †) that excludes all samples seen
during training.
A.3.3
RESULTS ON RETRIEVED AND NON-RETRIEVED SUBSETS
We extend our evaluation to report baseline and ablation results on two subsets of the ORD test
set, including Retrieved-case subset (reactions for which at least one similar-case was retrieved)
and No-retrieval subset (reactions for which no similar-case was found in the retrieval library) (in
Table 9). The results indicate that RAG-based LLM clearly benefits when similar reaction cases
are retrieved, while on both subsets, the Reasoning-based LLM and other baselines show relatively
small performance differences.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 8: Performance comparison of our method and various baseline models on the organic reaction
prediction task using the USPTO-MIT test set. For task-specific models, we directly report the
results (Exact Match) from their original publications.
Model
Model Type
Validity (%)
Exact Match (%)
FTS (%)
MORGAN
RDK
AVALON
Chemformer
Task-Specific Model
–
90.9
–
–
–
Molecular Transformer
–
88.6
–
–
–
LocalTransform
–
90.8
–
–
–
ChemDFM-13B
Chemical LLM
98.45
50.83
76.96
81.89
82.04
ChemDFM-8B
98.08
48.76
74.88
80.03
80.16
Text-Chem-T5
98.27
50.15
76.67
81.93
81.96
Reaction-Thinker
–
99.04
92.13
95.92
96.91
96.98
Reaction-Thinker †
–
99.02 †
90.90 †
95.40 †
96.46 †
96.51 †
Table 9: Exact Match performance on Retrieved-case and No-retrieval subset.
Model
Exact Match (%)
Retrieved-case subset
Exact Match (%)
No-retrieval subset
Chemformer
88.50
86.48
DeepSeek-R1
11.82
11.05
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct
0.55
0.50
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B
7.17
7.33
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B
6.58
6.25
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B
1.61
2.05
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
1.08
1.79
ChemDFM-13B
52.93
50.09
ChemDFM-8B
48.37
46.46
Text-Chem-T5
47.91
47.84
Reaction-Thinker (Reasoning-based)
68.57
68.24
Reaction-Thinker (RAG-based)
94.70
31.19
A.3.4
PERFORMANCE ROBUSTNESS
We conduct a thorough analysis of base models with varying parameter sizes (e.g., 7B, 8B, 14B,
32B) to systematically evaluate performance robustness (in Table 10). We perform analysis on the
ORD dataset using the same training and test splits as Reaction-Thinker (32B).
The results demonstrate that our method (combining human-chemist–style reasoning and key LLM
methodologies) performs robustly across various model scales, outperforms other chemical LLMs
of similar size (ChemDFM-13B, ChemDFM-8B, and Text-Chem-T5), and shows consistent perfor-
mance improvements as the number of model parameters increases.
Table 10: Exact Match performance of RAG-based and Reasoning-based LLMs across various
model parameter sizes on the ORD dataset. The Total Accuracy is the final result obtained by
weighting Qwen3 and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen at 81.7% and 18.3%, respectively.
Model Scaling
Model
Exact Match (%)
Total Accuracy (%)
32B
Qwen3-32B
94.70
89.86
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B
68.24
14B
Qwen3-14B
91.08
85.89
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B
62.73
8B
Qwen3-8B
90.61
84.53
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-8B
57.39
7B
Qwen3-7B
89.87
83.69
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
56.12
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A.4
INTERPRETABILITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we try to give a detailed analysis of the interpretability advantages provided by the
Reaction-Thinker. We elucidate these advantages from two main perspectives.
A.4.1
HUMAN-CENTERED EXPLANATIONS
Our method generates outputs specifically for human chemists, providing a reasoning process that
aligns with their professional mindset. It delivers not just a simple answer, but a step-by-step ra-
tionale. This allows users to quickly grasp the reaction mechanism and assess the credibility of
prediction by examining the correctness of the reasoning logic. Consequently, our interpretability
directly serves mechanism-driven organic reaction research, going beyond prediction task.
A.4.2
RELIABILITY OF THE REASONING PROCESS
It is well-known that LLM reasoning hallucinations are common. Even when the final answer is
correct, the intermediate chain-of-thought may be unfaithful. We enforce CoT quality through three
progressively stringent checks for this task:
• Format Compliance: Whether the reasoning follows a standard template.
• Framework Conformance: Whether it matches our predefined reasoning framework.
• Detailed Correctness: Whether the chain correctly tracks molecular structures, functional
groups, and reaction mechanism.
In practice, we concentrate on the first two levels (format and framework) because they can be
efficiently filtered using keyword and structural checks during large-scale data cleaning. As detailed
in Section CoT Dataset for Reaction Reasoning, our data pipeline is as follows:
• Design CoT Template: We manually designed high-quality CoT templates. We used GPT
to generate reasoning chains from selected samples, which were then reviewed and cor-
rected by both human chemists and GPT.
• Stage-1: We generated numerous reasoning chains using these templates, and filtered out
those violating format or framework requirements.
• Stage-2: We used the filtered CoT for SFT. Then we applied RL on the SFT-model, and
collected correct reasoning chains as additional training data.
In the analysis of cases where the final product prediction is correct, we find that some reasoning
chains contain detail errors including:
• Incorrect descriptions of molecular structures
• Misnaming or mis-functionality of functional groups
• Mistakes in the predicted reaction mechanism
We present a visualization of detailed analyses for two representative cases. One is the CoT Template
case (in Figure 6), and the other is a case where the result is correct but the reasoning process contains
the various issues listed above (in Figure 7).
Considering that verifying detailed mechanistic correctness at scale is extremely time-consuming,
we test on a small sample of 50 chains. We observe that our fully trained model (SFT + RL)
contained mechanistic errors in about 20% of the cases where the final product was correct. In
contrast, the Stage-1 SFT-model had a significantly higher error rate of 40-60%. This indicates
that our carefully constructed data and effective training methodology substantially reduce mech-
anistic errors while improving prediction accuracy. In other words, the explanations generated by
Reaction-Thinker are highly consistent with the correct predictions, highlighting the reliability of
the reasoning process.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
+
Reaction inputs
Reaction output
{Analyzing the given reactants and reagents}
The reactants and reagents include CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc(O[Si](C)(C)C(C)(C)C)cc3n2)cc1, 
a molecule with a central aromatic ring substituted with a pyridine moiety, and [F-], a fluoride ion.
{Hypothesizing the possible reaction mechanism}
The reaction may involve the following reaction centers: The silicon atom in the silyl ether group and 
its attached oxygen atom; The incoming fluoride ion interacts with the silicon. The reaction may include 
the transformation of a silyl ether to a hydroxyl group. This process typically involves a deprotection 
reaction where the silyl protecting group is removed, exposing the original alcohol. Here, the fluorine 
ion ([F-]) may act as a nucleophile in the mechanism, which is common for desilylation reactions.
{Predicting possible reactions}
Here are the possible mechanistic steps of this reaction. Nucleophilic attack: The fluoride ion 
attacks the silicon atom of the silyl ether. Silicon has a high affinity for fluorine due to its ability to 
form strong Si-F bonds. Cleavage of Si-O bond: As the Si-F bond forms, the Si-O bond is weakened 
and subsequently cleaved. This releases the Si group (usually as a volatile SiF compound), and the 
hydroxyl group is restored. Reformation of hydroxyl group: With the removal of the silyloxy group, 
a hydrogen from the solvent or environment can bond to the oxygen, completing the transformation 
to the hydroxyl group.
{Validating the reaction pathway}
Fluoride ion (F-) acts as a nucleophile and attacks the silicon atom in the TBDMS group. Upon attack 
by fluoride, the silicon center forms a pentavalent transition state, which is relatively stable because 
silicon can accommodate five bonds due to its size and electronic structure. This intermediate is often 
depicted with a negatively charged fluoride attached to silicon, briefly forming a complex where the 
oxygen-silicon bond is weakened.  As the intermediate collapses, the Si-O bond between the silyl group 
and the oxygen atom is cleaved, breaking the silyl ether linkage and releasing a free alcohol (-OH). 
After the Si-O bond has been cleaved, the molecule is left with a free hydroxyl group (-OH) in place of 
the silyl ether. The Si-F bond formation results in the formation of tert-butyldimethylsilyl fluoride (TBSF) 
as a byproduct. TBSF is relatively stable and does not interfere with the reaction further.
{Considering alternative possibilities}
The first possible reaction is that the fluoride ion could attack the electron-deficient aromatic ring near 
the nitrogen atoms, potentially displacing a substituent in a nucleophilic aromatic substitution. However, 
Nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) generally requires strong electron-withdrawing groups 
(e.g., -NO₂) ortho or para to the leaving group, which are not present in this molecule. Fluoride is more 
likely to target the silicon atom in the silyl group due to silicon's affinity for fluoride and the relatively low 
activation energy required for Si-O bond cleavage. The second possible reaction is that the nucleophilic 
fluoride could theoretically attack the methyl groups attached to the tertiary nitrogen, leading to 
N-dealkylation and removing one or both methyl groups. However, N-dealkylation would typically require 
a more electrophilic carbon (such as a benzylic or allylic carbon) or harsher conditions, such as oxidation. 
In contrast, the silicon-fluoride interaction is very strong, making the silyl ether bond much more susceptible 
to fluoride attack than the N-C bonds in the tertiary amine. Fluoride ions could, under special conditions, 
participate in deprotonating an aromatic C-H bond or causing other activation of the aromatic ring. 
However, Aromatic C-H activation is highly unlikely under these conditions and would generally require a 
transition-metal catalyst and more stringent conditions. The Si-O bond in the silyl ether is far more reactive 
toward fluoride under mild conditions. The last possible reaction could be a fluoride-mediated deprotection 
of a tert-butyldimethylsilyl (TBDMS) group, restoring the free hydroxyl (-OH) functionality in the aromatic 
compound. The high affinity between silicon and fluoride drives the reaction forward. The formation of the 
strong Si-F bond makes the reaction favorable and specific for silyl deprotection. The fluoride ion selectively
attacks the silicon center due to its high electrophilicity, leaving other functional groups (like the tertiary 
amine and aromatic rings) untouched.
{Confirming the reasoning process}
After reasoning and validation, CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1 is confirmed to be the final product.
{Final reasoning result}
Based on the above analysis, the reaction product is CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1. Instead of the 
silyl ether group, there is a hydroxyl (OH) group.
Analyze the reaction inputs
Verified as correct
Predict reaction mechanism
Verified as correct
Predict reaction pathway
Verified as correct
CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc(O[Si](C)(C)C(C)(C)C)cc3n2)cc1.[F-]>>CN(C)c1ccc(-c2cnc3ccc([OH])cc3n2)cc1
Confirm the final output
Verified as correct
Alternative Possibilities
Verified as correct
Figure 6: Detailed analyses for the CoT Template case. All critical parts are verified correct.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Reaction inputs
Reaction output
<think>
So I need to analyze the reaction step by step to reach the final answer. Here is a step-by-step analysis. 
{Analyzing the given reactants and reagents}
The reactants and reagents include: O=C(O)C(F)(F)F (trifluoroacetic acid), 
COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCNCC1)C(=O)OC2 (a complex aromatic compound with an amide and 
ether functional groups), CCN(C(C)C)C(C)C (tributylamine), O=Cc1cc2c(cn1)OCCO2 (a substituted 
benzene with an amide and ether), CC(=O)O[BH-](OC(C)=O)OC(C)=O (a borohydride reagent with 
ester groups), [Na+] (sodium ion), ClCCl (dichloromethane), and CO (carbon monoxide).
{Identifying the key functional groups and reagents}
The key functional groups in the reactants include carboxylic acids, amines, amides, ethers, and esters. 
The reagents include trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), tributylamine (TBA), borohydride (BH-), and sodium 
ion (Na+). Dichloromethane (ClCCl) and carbon monoxide (CO) are also present, but their roles need 
to be determined.
{Hypothesizing the possible reaction mechanism}
The reaction likely involves the following steps: 1) Deprotection of amide and ester groups using TFA.
2) Nucleophilic attack by the borohydride reagent on the carbonyl groups. 3) Formation of new amide
bonds through coupling reactions. 4) Solvent effects and role of dichloromethane and carbon monoxide.
{Predicting the primary reaction pathway}
1) Deprotection: TFA can deprotect the amide and ester groups, leading to the formation of free carboxylic 
acids and alcohols. 2) Nucleophilic attack: BH- can reduce the carbonyl groups to alcohols or form 
new amide bonds. 3) Coupling: The free carboxylic acids and amines can form amide bonds through a 
coupling reaction, possibly catalyzed by Na+. 
{Considering the role of dichloromethane and carbon monoxide}
Dichloromethane (ClCCl) is a common solvent in organic reactions. It can stabilize intermediates and 
transition states. Carbon monoxide (CO) can act as a ligand in transition metal catalysis or as a reducing 
agent in certain conditions. However, in this context, it is more likely a byproduct or a stabilizing agent.
{Predicting the final product}
The final product is COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCN(Cc3cc4c(cn3)OCCO4)CC1)C(=O)OC2. This 
compound has the same aromatic structure as the starting material but with the amide and ether groups 
modified. The new amide bond is formed between the amine and the carboxylic acid groups, and the ester 
group is reduced to an alcohol.
{Considering alternative possibilities}
1) Alternative deprotection: TFA might deprotect other functional groups, but the amide and ester groups 
are the most likely targets due to their reactivity. 2) Alternative nucleophilic attack: BH- could attack 
other carbonyl groups, but the amide and ester groups are the most reactive. 3) Alternative coupling: The 
coupling reaction could form different amide bonds, but the formation of the new amide bond is the most 
energetically favorable.
{Final reasoning result}
Based on the above analysis, the reaction product is 
COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCN(Cc3cc4c(cn3)OCCO4)CC1)C(=O)OC2. The new amide bond is formed 
between the amine and the carboxylic acid groups, and the ester group is reduced to an alcohol.
</think>
Under the stated conditions, the expected products of the reaction are
<chem>COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCN(Cc3cc4c(cn3)OCCO4)CC1)C(=O)OC2</chem>
Analyze the reaction inputs
Verified as incorrect:
CCN(C(C)C)C(C)C
Actually is N-ethyl-diisopropylamine,
also called DIPEA.
O=Cc1cc2c(cn1)OCCO2
Actually is an aromatic heterocycle 
bearing an aldehyde functional group.
CO
Not carbon monoxide, but methanol. 
Predict reaction mechanism
Predict reaction pathway
Verified as incorrect:
Carboxylic acids
No carboxylic acids actually.
CCN(C(C)C)C(C)C
Not TBA, but called DIPEA.
CC(=O)O[BH-](OC(C)=O)OC(C)=O
[Na+]
A reducing agent used for reductive 
amination, not generic BH⁻.
TFA 
In reductive amination, it promotes 
iminium formation, but is not a 
deprotecting reagent. Excess TFA 
hinders imine formation and interferes 
with the reductant.
CO
Actually is the reaction input, but not
byproduct.
Confirm the final output
Verified as correct
(1) O=C(O)C(F)(F)F
(2) COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCNCC1)C(=O)OC2
(3) CCN(C(C)C)C(C)C
(4) O=Cc1cc2c(cn1)OCCO2
(5)  CC(=O)O[BH-](OC(C)=O)OC(C)=O
(6) [Na+]
(7) ClCCl
(8) CO
COc1ccc2c(c1)N(CCCN1CCN(Cc3cc4c(cn3)OCCO4)CC1)C(=O)CO2
Alternative Possibilities
Based on a false premise, all the 
conclusions are therefore meaningless.
Figure 7: In this case, the final product is correct, but the model exhibits substantial errors in rea-
soning about molecular structures, functional-group identification, and the reaction mechanisms.
Content shown in green is correct, content in red is clearly erroneous, and content in yellow may be
subject to debate.
23