--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ROBOMD: UNCOVERING ROBOT VULNERABILITIES
THROUGH SEMANTIC POTENTIAL FIELDS
Som Sagar
Arizona State University
ssagar6@asu.edu
Jiafei Duan
University of Washington
Sreevishakh Vasudevan
Arizona State University
Yifan Zhou
Arizona State University
Heni Ben Amor
Arizona State University
Dieter Fox
University of Washington
Ransalu Senanayake
Arizona State University
ABSTRACT
Robot manipulation policies, while central to the promise of physical AI, are
highly vulnerable in the presence of external variations in the real-world. Diag-
nosing these vulnerabilities is hindered by two key challenges: (i) the relevant
variations to test against are often unknown, and (ii) direct testing in the real
world is costly and unsafe. We introduce a framework that tackles both issues
by learning a separate deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) policy for vulnera-
bility prediction through virtual runs on a continuous vision–language embedding
trained with limited success-failure data. By treating this embedding space, which
is rich in semantic and visual variations, as a potential field, the policy learns to
move toward vulnerable regions while being repelled from success regions. This
vulnerability prediction policy, trained on virtual rollouts, enables scalable and
safe vulnerability analysis without expensive physical trials. By querying this
policy, our framework builds a probabilistic vulnerability-likelihood map. Ex-
periments across simulation benchmarks and a physical robot arm show that our
framework uncovers up to 23% more unique vulnerabilities than state-of-the-art
vision–language baselines, revealing subtle vulnerabilities overlooked by heuristic
testing. Additionally, we show that fine-tuning the manipulation policy with vul-
nerabilities discovered by our framework improves performance with much less
data. GitHub: https://github.com/somsagar07/RoboMD.
1
INTRODUCTION
Learning robust robot manipulation policies is widely regarded as the foundational problem in phys-
ical AI. A robust solution would unlock capabilities ranging from reliable industrial automation in
cluttered factory environments to assistive humanoid arms that seamlessly interact with people in
everyday settings. In perception and language tasks, vulnerabilities can often be quickly identified
by querying large datasets or benchmarks, with little cost beyond computation. In manipulation,
however, discovering vulnerabilities is far more difficult: it requires physical trials that are slow,
expensive, and potentially unsafe, posing risks not only to the robot but also to the environment
and even people. This makes naive heuristic testing or trial-and-error both impractical and costly,
motivating the need for scalable, active vulnerability exploration methods pre-deployment. In this
paper, we pursue this by training a separate vulnerability prediction model, formulated as a deep
reinforcement learning (deep RL) policy that actively searches for failures.
Yet, even with a scalable search framework, a second obstacle remains: what exactly should we
test for? Manipulation policies must withstand diverse and unpredictable variations. For instance,
referring to Fig. 1, a robot designed to grasp a bottle should generalize across various colors, shapes,
sizes, and materials, and remain effective under changes in lighting, background, and physical lay-
outs Pumacay et al. (2024); Xie et al. (2024). Naively applying deep RL to a handful of known
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
<
<
<
π
π
π
Figure 1: The vulnerability diagnostic pipeline. We train RoboMD (πMD), a deep reinforcement
learning (RL) policy, by probing a pre-trained manipulation policy (πR) while systematically apply-
ing environmental variations (e.g., background colors, object shapes, darkness levels, etc.) as RL
actions, examples of which are shown in the “Action Samples” panel (bottom left). Note that these
examples are for intuitive understanding only; the user does not need to specify all variations. By
observing the success or failure on each trial of πR, RoboMD learns to identify vulnerabilities even
in unseen variations (e.g., a red cube, in this example). The final output is a diagnosis report that
can either provide a ranked list of failure likelihoods, including for previously unseen variations (top
right), or quantify the failure probabilities for previously seen variations (bottom right).
variations to search for failures risks overlooking critical failure modes that emerge under novel
conditions; Lin et al. (2024).
We overcome these limitations by reformulating deep RL exploration over a learned, continuous
vision-language embedding space rather than discrete, hand-specified variations. Constructed from
limited success-failure data, we ensure that this embedding space is rich in semantic and visual
structure. We cast the learned space as a potential field that guides exploration toward failures and
away from successes. This, in turn, allows us to train the deep RL-based vulnerability search policy
that organically uncovers relationships and adapts to diverse variations. This policy can be queried at
any time to predict whether a scenario will lead to failure, enabling scalable and systematic diagnosis
of manipulation policies. The main contributions of the paper can be summarized as:
1. Proposing a deep RL-based framework that operates in a semantically rich embedding
space, for diagnosing failures in pre-trained manipulation policies.
2. Providing extensive experimental evidence on simulated and real-world setups, backed by
theoretical guarantees.
3. Systematically improving robot policies using the failures diagnosed by our framework.
2
RELATED WORK
Failures in large models can be characterized by querying vision-language foundation models Agia
et al. (2024); Duan et al. (2024); Klein et al. (2024); Subramanyam et al. (2025); Liu et al. (2023)
or searching for failures Sagar et al. (2024). As we further verify in experiments, the former does
not show strong performance in deciphering failures as they do not iteratively interact with the robot
policy. Furthermore, VLM models alone are not yet capable of making highly accurate quantitative
predictions such as probabilities, making them difficult to use in high-stakes tasks. In the latter
approach, outside of robotics, deep RL has recently been employed in machine learning to identify
errors in classification and generation Sagar et al. (2024). Similarly, Delecki et al. (2022); Hong
et al. (2024) utilized Markov decision processes to explore challenging rainy conditions, which
is backed by the work of Corso et al. (2021), highlighting the role of sequential decision-making
models to ensure the safety of black-box systems. Note that these approaches have neither been
demonstrated on complex physical systems like manipulation nor can they generalize beyond a
fixed set of known failures, both of which we address.
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection methods can also be used to identify unseen inputs, for in-
stance, in automotive perception Nitsch et al. (2021), runtime policy monitoring Agia et al. (2024),
and regression Thiagarajan et al. (2023). However, failure detection constitutes a different prob-
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
a1
a2
Finding Likelihood of 
unknown action
Generate Data
Improved Manipulation
Policy
Finetune
P(        ) > P(        )
a1
a2
Finding Failure Likelihood
Fine-tune
Pass all action
Action distribution
Finding Likelihood 
of known actions
Reinforcement Learning
RoboMD Policy
- Reward
Rollouts
Action
Changed
Environment
known variations
Manipulation Policy
t=0
t=1
t=2
+ Reward
Distractor 
added
1
2
3
4
(1)
(2)
(3)
Figure 2: Our framework operates in three stages: (1) a PPO-based deep RL agent (πMD) perturbs
the environment to reveal configurations that cause failures in the pre-trained manipulation policy
(πR); (2) its learned action distribution conditioned on the input observation is converted into failure-
mode probabilities, either over a continuous embedding for novel changes or via discrete candidates;
and (3) those probabilities are used to fine-tune πR for improved performance.
lem than OOD detection, as not all OOD samples lead to failure, and failures can also occur in-
distribution. We aim to characterize failures both within and beyond the training distribution, not
merely flag OOD instances. A related area of research is uncertainty quantification, which underpins
many OOD detection methods. While many attempts have been made to characterize the epistemic
uncertainty Senanayake (2024), the unknown unknowns, in robot perception systems O’Callaghan
& Ramos (2012); Kendall & Gal (2017), only a few attempts have been made to address this chal-
lenge in deep RL Jiang et al. (2024) and imitation learning Jeon et al. (2018); Brown et al. (2020);
Ramachandran & Amir (2007). As robot policy models grow increasingly complex, formally char-
acterizing epistemic uncertainty becomes extremely challenging. Even if we can, such techniques
do not inform engineers where the models fail, making it harder to further improve the policies.
Generalized policies are less prone to failures.
Toward achieving this goal, generalization in
robotics has been extensively studied to enable robots to adapt to diverse scenarios. Large-scale sim-
ulation frameworks have been developed to evaluate the robustness of robotic policies across varied
tasks and environmental conditions Pumacay et al. (2024); Fang et al. (2025). Vision-language-
action models trained on multimodal datasets have demonstrated significant advancements in im-
proving adaptability to real-world scenarios Brohan et al. (2022; 2023). Additionally, approaches
such as curriculum learning and domain randomization have proven effective in enhancing gener-
alization by exposing models to progressively complex or randomized environments Andrychowicz
et al. (2020). These methodologies collectively address the challenges of policy robustness. In con-
trast to these training focused methods, our framework acts as a diagnostic tool that is complemen-
tary to them as it can systematically identify failures in policies trained using any such approaches.
Ultimately, no matter how general the model is, unforeseen conditions and subtle variations will
always rise, making systematic diagnostic tools indispensable for real-world deployments. Oth-
ers have tackled safety from control-theoretic Bajcsy & Fisac (2024); Grimmeisen et al. (2024),
human-factors Sanneman & Shah (2022), statistical-certification Farid et al. (2022); Ren & Majum-
dar (2022); Yang et al. (2020); Vincent et al. (2023), and formal-methods Tmov et al. (2013) perspec-
tives. While these enhance overall robustness, our framework diagnoses failures pre-deployment to
help guide policy improvement.
3
METHODOLOGY
We analyze vulnerabilities of a pre-trained manipulation policy, πR, by training a separate vul-
nerability prediction policy, named RoboMD, πMD. RoboMD is designed to be agnostic to the
architecture or underlying training method of πR. Whether πR is trained via behavioral cloning,
reinforcement learning, foundation models, or any future methods, πMD only requires rollouts of πR,
making πMD adaptable to a wide range of manipulation policies and tasks. In Section 3.1, we first
formalize the failure diagnosis problem as a sequential search problem. Building on this formula-
tion, in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we show how πMD can search for vulnerabilities in space of variations
that is not known. We also show a special case of it, where we can systematically test over a dis-
crete set of known variations. After describing how vulnerabilities can be queried at runtime in
Section 3.4, we theoretically ground each step in our framework in Section 3.5.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Rollout Frames
CLIP
ViT
The object is changed to Fanta 
bottle. Lighting changed to Normal.
Rollout_1
Rollout_2
Rollout_3
{  
   Rollout_1: The object is changed 
to Fanta bottle. Lighting changed to 
Normal.
    Rollout_3:  The object is     
changed to Red cuboid. Lighting 
changed to Green.   
}
Flattened
We do RL search in this 
embedding space 
t=0
t=1
t=2
t=3
t=4
....
MLP Projector
Figure 3: The pipeline shows how rollouts with variations (e.g., object or lighting changes) are
processed to learn meaningful embeddings. Visual data and text from the rollouts are embedded
using ViT and CLIP, and then projected to an MLP, followed by failure-success classification.
3.1
FORMALIZING FAILURE DIAGNOSIS AS A SEARCH PROBLEM IN A SEMANTIC SPACE
Overview. As rationalized in Section 1, we first learn a continuous vision-language embedding
to project raw manipulation data into a semantically meaningful representation of the success or
failure of πR (Fig. 3). We then learn πMD by exploring this space using proximal policy optimiza-
tion (Fig. 10). Once trained, πMD can be queried to predict a ranked map of vulnerable conditions
for the manipulation task. An overview of how to train and query πMD, along with how to use
πMD to improve πR is shown in Fig. 2.
We consider a continuous semantic embedding space, E, that represents some limited notions of suc-
cess and failure of πR (details on training this embedding is provided in Section 3.2). We train πMD
to traverse this space and learn how to predict failures. Treating the manipulation policy πR(at|st)
and the robot’s environment as a black box, we formulate this traversal of πMD as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP), defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩:
• State Space (S): The state st ∈S ≡E is a realization of the continuous semantic embed-
ding, represented as a vector st ∈R512. While every physically instantiated environment
variation corresponds to a state in S, not all realizations of S necessarily translate to a
physically plausible environment variation. Thus, all S can be viewed as the set of hypoth-
esized environment variations, accessible through the embedding, which may include both
physically viable and unviable variations. See Fig. 1 for intuition on variations.
• Action Space (A): An action at ∈A ≡E introduces a variation to st. By taking different
actions, πMD can jump from one hypothesized environment variation (a state) to another.
While actions can have a physical meaning (e.g., making the environment darker), we do
not explicitly define them because an action can be any vector value, at ∈R512.
• Transition (P): The transition function P(st+1|st, at) is determined by applying the vari-
ation at to the state st, which results in st+1.
• Reward (R): πMD is rewarded for finding failures quickly.
• Discount Factor (γ): We use a standard discount factor of γ = 0.99.
The goal of learning πMD is to find a sequence of actions (environment variations), which maximizes
the probability of πR to fail at its task. The next sections provide exact details of the procedure.
3.2
BUILDING THE SEMANTIC EMBEDDING AS A POTENTIAL FIELD OF SUCCESS-FAILURES
To predict vulnerabilities of unseen environments, we need at least two pieces of information: 1)
some prior belief of where vulnerabilities might occur and 2) a way to generalize that belief to
unseen conditions. We construct the belief from a limited set of labeled rollouts, which are then used
to train a vision–language embedding that captures semantic similarity between vulnerabilities. By
operating directly in this embedding, πMD extends its search to a continuous action space.
Our approach hinges on creating this embedding space E such that the relationship between implicit
environment variations and policy failures is locally smooth. More formally, we learn an embedding
that acts as a potential function, Φ, over the space of environmental variations. Later, in Section 3.5,
we show that reward shaping based on a potential difference, F(st, a, st+1) = γΦ(st+1) −Φ(st),
guarantees that the optimal policy is preserved and provides a dense learning signal for convergence.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Unknown Region
Success Region
Failure Region
Known Embeddings
Action Region
RL Action 
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
“Bread”
“Milk Carton”
“Sprite Bottle”
“Red Cube”
“Fanta Bottle”
Figure 4: RL exploration in continuous embed-
ding space E. Stars (✩) denote known embed-
dings (Eknown) obtained from the dataset D. This
induces regions of failure and success. The rest
are unknown regions. Dashed boundaries group
similar environment variations sharing a common
physical meaning. The orange circles and arrows
show the RL agent’s transition sequence, attract-
ing towards failures and repelling from successes.
Since each step is obtained without robot rollouts,
each one is a hypothesized environment variation.
Since the transitions are biased toward failures,
πMD learns to encode the failure distribution.
To construct this potential field of success-
failures, we train a multimodal embedding that
organizes environmental variations based on a
set of labeled success-failure rollouts. To this
end, we collect M rollouts from πR for a given
task with D = {(xvision
i
, xlang
i
), yi}M
i=1, where
xvision is the raw image input that we typi-
cally provide to manipulation policies, xlang
is a short textual description of the task, and
y ∈{failure, success}.
Since we know the
action (environment variation) we apply, the
textual description can be automatically con-
structed (see Appendix F). Note that this dataset
is created by collecting environmental varia-
tions (e.g., object color, lighting changes) cho-
sen based on prior observations, assumptions
and knowledge of conditions that often ex-
pose policy vulnerabilities. Using this data, as
shown in Fig. 3,we train a dual backbone archi-
tecture that consists of:
1. A Vision Transformer (ViT) back-
bone Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) to con-
vert xvision
i
to visual features. Vision
transformers capture the contextual relationships within the visual input. Since the original
ViT is trained on millions of images from ImageNet with thousands of object categories,
this backbone helps to build semantic relationships of everyday environments, so that πMD
can infer about an unseen environment from similar environments.
2. A CLIP encoder Radford et al. (2021) to process semantic descriptions. Since robots op-
erate in complex environments, we empirically found (Section 4.2) that providing a task
description in natural language helps to focus on the necessary features of the vision input.
The dual backbone combines complementary strengths, resulting in a multimodal embedding that
enables better generalization across different environmental variations. The outputs are projected
and concatenated, which is passed through a 512-unit MLP layer followed by a classification head.
We define the output of the 512 embedding vector as ei for an arbitrary input (xvision
i
, xlang
i
).
The architecture is trained with backpropagation using a joint objective of binary cross-entropy with
the classification output y and a contrastive loss objective L at the MLP layer, which, as we later
show in Section 3.5, structures E as a potential field to enforce smoothness within E. It minimizes
the potential difference between embeddings of rollouts with similar outcomes while maximizing it
for rollouts with different outcomes. L is defined as:
L =
X
i,j∈D

1
yi=yjdij +
1
yi̸=yj max(0, m −dij)

,
(1)
where, dij = ∥ei −ej∥2 is the Euclidean distance between two randomly sampled points in D,
with m hyperparameter margin. The MLP layer projects raw vision-language data to an embedding
space, E. The inputs in D are now assigned to an environmental variation in the semantic space.
Because the space is structured such that proximity corresponds to outcome similarity, πMD can now
be trained with virtual rollouts to efficiently map the entire landscape of potential failures in E.
3.3
DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN THE CONTINUOUS SEMANTIC SPACE
The agent πMD can now navigate through E guided by some of its known realizations, Eknown =
{ei; i ∈D}, a set of pre-computed embeddings derived from D. Note that Eknown ⊂E and ei ∈R512.
These embeddings serve as reference points in the action space, representing well-understood re-
gions where failure/success is already observed. As shown in Algorithm 1, the πMD samples an
action a∗
t+1 from the embeddings space and finds the closest embedding in Eknown to obtain its cor-
responding action a, thus performing an action implicitly applies a variation to the environment,
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
although we are not explicitly changing the physical environment. Therefore, these actions are ex-
tremely cheap compared to explicitly changing the environment and running rollouts. To optimize
πMD we use PPO Schulman et al. (2017), which provides stable training while maintaining suffi-
cient exploration. In a continuous space, PPO’s entropy regularization is especially important, as it
prevents the agent from collapsing to a few modes and instead encourages coverage of the broader
space. We define the reward function to encourage discovering failure regions while discouraging
both large deviations from Eknown and repetitive actions since large deviations lead to uncertain re-
gions, while repetitive actions can indicate a stalled search. This reward mechanism is captured by:
R(s, a) =
(
Kfailure
penalty+1 −k · N(a),
if failure,
−
Ksuccess
horizon×(penalty+1),
if success.
(2)
Algorithm 1 Learning πMD policy
1: Inputs: D = {(xvision
i
, xlang
i
), yi}M
i=1
2: Precompute: Eknown from D
3: Init: steps N, reward r = 0, πMD = rand
4: for t = 0 to N do
5:
Sample at+1 ∼πMD(st)
6:
a∗
t+1 ←arg mine∈Eknown ∥at+1 −e∥2
7:
st+1 ←πMD(st|a∗
t+1)
8:
r ←r + R(st+1)
9:
if failure detected then
10:
Reset; r ←0
11:
end if
12: end for
13: Outputs: RoboMD policy πMD
Here, failure-success is inferred from the clos-
est point in D and the distance penalty in the
denominator, scales with ∥a −e∥, ∀e ∈Eknown.
The penalty can be related to the potential field
in terms of ∥a −e∥2 = ∥Φ(sa) −Φ(se)∥2,
where sa and se are the states reached by apply-
ing actions a and e, respectively. The frequency
penalty, N(a), counts consecutive repeats of a,
and we set the coefficient k = 5. The frequency
penalty serves as a practical mechanism to pro-
mote exploration, preventing the agent from re-
peatedly sampling the same point and push-
ing it toward uncertain regions. This approach
aligns with the principles of Theorem 2, which
states that concentrating exploration near the
decision boundary between success and failure
leads to more efficient identification of vulnerabilities. Fig. 4 illustrates this process, where RL
samples embeddings to steer toward failure-prone regions without requiring full policy rollouts.
Special case: when the candidate variations are known.
If the set of candidate variations in
Eknown is explicitly given (e.g., constructed from historical failures or expert knowledge), then πMD
merely has to search over A ≡Eknown. In this setting, πMD gradually modifies the environment
by applying a finite sequence of predefined actions (a1, a2, . . . , an) until a failure is induced. For
instance, the sequence change table color to black →adjust light level to 50% →set table size to X
yields an environment with a black table of size X, and 50% lighting. The reward function assigns a
positive scalar when the outcome is a failure, and a negative scalar when the outcome is a success.
3.4
FROM PREDICTING VULNERABILITIES TO IMPROVING ROBOT POLICY PERFORMANCE
The agent πMD outputs a probability distribution over variations (actions), which can directly be
interpreted as a map of failure likelihoods. This allows us to both identify highly vulnerable condi-
tions and use them to guide manipulation policy improvement. In the embedding space constructed
in Section 3.2, πMD(a | s) is modeled as a Gaussian density p(a | s) on R512. Although p(at) = 0
for any exact action, likelihood ratios are well defined: pMD(at1|s)
pMD(at2|s), indicating which variation is more
failure-prone, analogous to PPO’s probability-ratio objective. The confidence of these likelihood es-
timates can be found using the proximity of the current state embedding es to the nearest e ∈E,
measured by mine∈E ∥e −es∥. When restricted to a finite candidate set Eknown, as in the special
case described in Section 3.2, the same mechanism reduces to a categorical distribution over Eknown,
where mass gradually concentrates on failure-inducing variations. In such cases, likelihoods are
given by πMD(a | s) =
exp(fa(s))
P
a′ exp(fa′(s)), which is a probability mass function (PMF) over the discrete
action set A, where fa(s) is the logit for action a.
Improving πR with findings from πMD. The likelihood of actions yields a prioritized list of
failure modes, which allows practitioners to move beyond collecting broad, unfocused rollouts.
Instead, we can target data collection on the highest likelihood failures (e.g., specific lighting or
object variations), and fine-tune πR on this compact dataset to systematically patch vulnerabilities,
as we will demonstrate in Section 4.4.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.5
THEORETICAL UNDERPINNINGS AND GUARANTEES
We establish that the potential field we build in embedding space does not negatively affect the
overall reward but makes the convergence faster.
Theorem 1 (Advantage Invariance in a Semantic Potential Field). Let πMD be the policy for the
MDP defined in Sec 3. Let the continuous action space be structured by the embedding e, which
is trained via the contrastive loss L (Eq 1) to function as a potential function, Φ(s) = es. The
search performed by πMD in this space is equivalent to learning in a shaped MDP where the implicit
shaping function is F(s, a, s′) = γΦ(s′) −Φ(s), for which the following hold: (i) Optimality: any
optimal policy in the shaped MDP is also optimal in the original MDP. (ii) Advantage invariance:
A∗(s, a)shaped = A∗(s, a)original, indicating that the relative advantage is invariant.
Proof Sketch. From potential-based shaping theory Ng et al. (1999), Q∗
shaped(s, a) = Q∗
orig(s, a) −
Φ(s) and V ∗
shaped(s) = V ∗
orig(s) −Φ(s), where Q and V are Q and value functions, respectively.
Subtracting shows the Φ(s) cancels, proving advantage invariance. (Full proof in Appendix A)
Having established the correctness of the reward, we now demonstrate that it facilitates efficient
exploration of the failure–success boundary while enabling faster convergence.
Theorem 2 (Sample-Efficient Boundary Exploration). Let actions a ∈A be mapped by an L-
Lipschitz embedding e(a). If πMD is trained with reward R(a) = Rtask(a) + βH(a) for β > 0,
where H(a) is predictive uncertainty, then: (i) R(a) is Lipschitz, yielding stable gradients for PPO.
(ii) Exploration concentrates near the success/failure boundary, identifying it to precision ϵ with
rollouts polynomial in 1/ϵ.
Proof Sketch. The semantic potential induced by the multimodal embedding e(s), trained with BCE
and contrastive loss is Lipschitz continuous (proof in Lemma 1 in Appendix A), which ensures
smooth rewards and stable gradients. The information-gain drives exploration toward uncertain
boundary regions, yielding sample-efficient discovery. (Full proof in Appendix A)
Theorem 3 (Convergence Acceleration Due to Potential Field). Let PPO train a critic with Bell-
man updates of the form ∥ξt+1∥∞≤γ∥ξt∥∞+ ϵ with critic error e and approximation error ϵ. If
potential shaping induces a transformed critic with smaller initialization error ξ′
0 < ξ0 and smaller
approximation error ϵ′ < ϵ, then for any ε > ϵ′/(1 −γ) with discount factor γ, the shaped critic
reaches ∥ξ′
T ∥∞≤ε in fewer iterations than the unshaped critic.
Proof Sketch. Due to Theorem 1, the error recursion solves to ∥ξT ∥∞≤γKe0 + 1−γT
1−γ ϵ. Since
both ξ′
0 and ϵ′ are strictly smaller, the shaped process crosses any target ε earlier, implying faster
convergence of PPO. (Full proof in Appendix A)
4
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present a series of experiments designed to validate RoboMD. Our evaluation is
structured around three central research questions:
1. How does RoboMD’s failure diagnosis compare to alternative approaches, including other
RL algorithms and VLMs?
2. How effectively does RoboMD generalize its diagnostic capabilities from a known set of
perturbations to entirely unseen environmental variations?
3. Do the failure modes identified by RoboMD provide actionable insights that lead to mea-
surable improvements in the robustness of a pre-trained policy?
4.1
BENCHMARK COMPARISONS
Experimental setup: Our simulated experiments are conducted in RoboSuite Zhu et al. (2020) using
datasets from RoboMimic Mandlekar et al. (2021) and MimicGen Mandlekar et al. (2023) (Fig. 7).
We evaluate across four standard tasks: lift, stack, threading, and pick & place, which represent a
range of manipulation challenges with varying levels of difficulty. These tasks are tested against a
diverse set of standard manipulation policies, including Behavior Cloning (BC), Hierarchical BC
(HBC), BC-Transformer, Batch Constrained Q-Learning (BCQ), and Diffusion policies.
We first benchmark πMD against a suite of baselines to answer our first research question regard-
ing comparative performance. To this end, we construct a dataset of 500 success-failure pairs,
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Reinforcement Learning Models
Model
Lift
Square
Pick Place
Avg. Score
A2C
74.2%
79.0%
72.0%
75.0
PPO
82.3%
84.0%
76.0%
80.7
SAC
51.2%
54.6%
50.8%
52.2
Vision–Language Models
Qwen2-VL
32.0%
24.6%
57.4%
38.0
Gemini 1.5 Pro
59.0%
36.4%
37.4%
44.3
GPT-4o
57.0%
44.0%
32.0%
33.3
GPT-4o-ICL (5 Shot)
57.4%
48.6%
57.0%
54.3
Small Models (Appendix B)
CNN
46.0%
57.0%
49.0%
50.6
ResNet
49.0%
52.0%
44.0%
48.3
Table 1: Benchmark results (Accuracy) compar-
ing RL controllers, VLM’s, and lightweight mod-
els each paired with a BC-MLP low-level policy.
πMD consistently outperforms other baselines.
Algorithm
Lift
Pick Place
Threading
Stack
BC
82.5%
76.0%
68.0%
88.0%
BCQ
61.5%
72.5%
62.0%
72.0%
HBC
83.5%
79.0%
73.0%
81.0%
BC Transformer
74.5%
72.0%
82.0%
70.5%
Diffusion
85.0%
71.0%
71.0%
62.0%
Table 2: RoboMD failure detection accuracy
across different tasks.
350
Figure 5: Action diversity across algorithms.
Red Cube
Sprite
Fanta
Milk Carton
Figure 6: Diagnosis of manipulation policies. Each plot shows failure likelihood (∝radius) for
different actions across environments (real-world in left, and simulation middle and right).
Figure 7: (Top) real world,
(Bottom) simulation.
Refer
Appendix C for all variations.
where each pair consists of a randomly selected success and failure
case. Since a successful action will rank higher than a failure, this
provides ground truth to evaluate πMD’s ranking consistency. The
results, summarized in Table 1, demonstrate that πMD outperforms
all other methods in ranking accuracy across all tasks. We also con-
ducted evaluations with state-of-the-art proprietary models (GPT-
4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro) and an open-source model (Qwen2-VL).
Additionally, we extended the evaluation of GPT-4o by employ-
ing in-context learning (ICL) with 5-shot demonstrations to gauge
its adaptability, ICL improves the performance of GPT-4o, partic-
ularly in the Square task. However, overall VLM performance re-
mains below 60%, indicating that these models struggle with re-
liably predicting environment configurations. To compare explo-
ration across RL algorithms (i.e., why PPO?), we analyze the action distributions of A2C Mnih
(2016), SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018), and PPO over 21 environment variations (See Appendix F.2).
As shown in Fig. 5 and Table 4, PPO achieves the highest entropy (2.8839), indicating its suitability
for broader exploration needed for failure discovery. We further evaluate πMD’s failure detection
performance in a variety of standard policies trained using different training methods. The results in
Table 2 demonstrate that πMD generalizes well across different tasks and policy architectures.
4.2
ANALYZING DIAGNOSTIC CAPABILITIES
We now evaluate πMD’s ability to diagnose unseen and seen environments, addressing our second
research question.
Unseen Environments: The primary strength of πMD is its ability to generalize. We test this by
asking πMD to rank the failure likelihood of variations it has never seen during training. The results
in Table 3 shows in both simulation and the real world, πMD correctly ranks the failure likelihood of
unseen items (e.g., the “Bread” for the UR5e, “Black Table” in simulation) relative to known items.
The consistency of these rankings validates that E successfully captures the semantic relationships
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3: In real (ar: {Bread [unseen], Red Cube, Milk Carton, Sprite}) vs. simulated (as: {Red
Table, Black Table [unseen], Green Lighting}) environments, rank consistency measures ordering
agreement, and accuracy is computed over 21 unseen variations.
Task ID
Algorithm
Continuous Rank
Ground Truth Rank
Consistency
Accuracy (↑)
Real Robot (UR5e)
ModAttn Zhou et al. (2022)
ar1 > ar2 > ar3 > ar4
ar1 > ar2 > ar3 > ar4
✓
-
Sim. Can
HBC Mandlekar et al. (2020)
as1 > as2 > as3
as1 = as2 > as3
✓
61%
Sim. Square
Diffusion Chi et al. (2023)
as1 > as2 > as3
as1 = as2 > as3
✓
68%
Sim. Stack
BCQ Fujimoto et al. (2019)
as1 > as2 > as3
as1 = as2 > as3
✓
80%
Sim. Threading
BC Transformer
as1 > as2 > as3
as1 = as2 > as3
✓
74%
Table 4: Failure characteristics for known action
spaces. FSI indicate robustness.
Model
Entropy (↓)
NFM (↓)
FSI (↓)
IQL Kostrikov et al. (2021)
2.49
4
0.72
BCQ Fujimoto et al. (2019)
2.79
6
1.15
BC Transformer
2.47
5
0.98
HBC Mandlekar et al. (2020)
2.11
4
0.68
BC (Two-Image Input)
2.14
3
0.63
BC (Proprioceptive + Image)
2.58
3
0.75
SmolVLA Shukor et al. (2025)
1.76
2
0.73
π0 Black et al. (2024)
1.40
1
0.77
GR00T Bjorck et al. (2025)
1.54
2
0.82
Table 5: πR fine-tuning strategies. Errors are
w.r.t. an ideal policy. Refer Fig. 9.
Fine-tuning (FT)
Accuracy
Mean Square
Chi-Square
Strategies
% (↑)
Error (↓)
Error (↓)
Pre-trained
67.91
0.377
0.016
FT with RoboMD
92.83
0.033
0.001
FT with 1 failures
71.25
0.068
0.002
FT with 2 failures
75.83
0.140
0.006
FT with 3 failures
75.41
0.050
0.002
FT with 4 failures
80.00
0.128
0.005
FT with all failures
85.48
0.069
0.003
that govern policy failure. As ablations, we also test the quality of the Eknown by comparing three
configurations: using only BCE loss, using BCE with and our contrastive loss, and an image-only
backbone model. The results are shown in Fig. 8 and Table 9. The confusion matrix for the full
model (Image+Text with BCE+Contrastive loss) shows a strong diagonal structure, indicating high
separability between different actions. Quantitatively, this model achieves the lowest MSE (0.1801)
and Frobenius distance (7.6387) from an ideal identity matrix. This confirms that multimodal inputs
and a contrastive loss is crucial for creating a locally consistent embedding space.
Seen Environments: Fig. 6 visualizes the failure likelihoods that πMD generates for different ma-
nipulation policies. HBC policy shows high robustness, which is quantitatively confirmed by its low
Failure Severity Index (FSI) and small number of failure modes (NFM) in Table 4. FSI quantifies the
weighted impact defined by PN
i=1 Pfailure(ai) · Wi where Pfailure represents the probability of failure
for action ai, and Wi is the normalized weight such that the failure with the highest probability is
assigned a weight of 1. The significant variation in failure patterns across different policies (e.g.,
BC Transformer vs. HBC) is expected, as different architectures have unique inductive biases and
thus different weaknesses, all of which are effectively captured by πMD.
4.3
ABLATION: EMBEDDING QUALITY AND SEMANTIC CONTINUITY
9.095
9.090
9.085
9.080
9.075
9.070
9.065
9.060
t-SNE Dimension 1
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
t-SNE Dimension 2
Failure
(Red=255)
Failure
(Red=235)
Success
(Red=187)
Success
(Red=163)
Success
(Red=140)
0
1
Success Rate
Figure 10: Embedding space E demonstrates a
clear semantic continuity between failure and suc-
cess states: as the red light intensity is decreased,
the model transitions smoothly from failure clus-
ters to success clusters.
RoboMD relies on a vision–language embed-
ding that must both separate success and fail-
ure modes and vary smoothly under physical
changes.
As shown in Table 6, the learned
embedding forms well-separated and compact
clusters across simulated tasks and real-world
SO101 policies, with large separation ratios,
high effect sizes, strong silhouette scores, and
low Davies–Bouldin indices. In addition, Ta-
ble 7 demonstrates semantic continuity under
a controlled lighting-intensity sweep for a BC
policy trained to pick up a cube under normal
lighting, where cumulative embedding distance
increases monotonically as illumination decreases (Kendall’s τ = 1.000, Pearson’s r = 0.982). To-
gether, these results confirm that the embedding is both structurally well-organized and semantically
smooth, justifying its use as a continuous potential field for PPO-based exploration.
4.4
ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS: FAILURE-GUIDED πR POLICY IMPROVEMENT
Finally, we address our third research question: whether the diagnostic signal provided by πMD can
be directly leveraged to improve policy robustness. Using the top-ranked failures identified by πMD,
we construct a targeted dataset for fine-tuning a pre-trained BC-lift manipulation policy. As shown in
Fig. 9, vulnerabilities exhibited by the pre-trained policy are substantially mitigated after RoboMD-
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 6:
Embedding-space grouping metrics
across simulated tasks and real-world policies.
High separation ratio (Sep.), silhouette score
(Silh.), together with a low Davies-Bouldin
(DB) index.
Task
Sep. (↑)
Silh. (↑)
DB (↓)
Lift – BC
22.99
0.91
0.15
Square – BC
20.23
0.88
0.25
SO101 – SmolVLA
10.37
0.87
0.35
SO101 – ACT
7.76
0.84
0.38
SO101 – π0
23.97
0.95
0.07
Table 7: Monotonic embedding-distance pro-
gression under decreasing lighting intensity.
Cumulative distance from the initial demonstra-
tion increases smoothly as illumination is re-
duced, demonstrating semantic continuity.
Demo
Success
C. Dist.
Step Dist.
Demo 1 (High)
0
0.00
0.00
Demo 2
0
0.22
0.22
Demo 3
1
0.55
0.35
Demo 4
1
0.58
0.07
Demo 5 (Low)
1
0.67
0.11
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cosine Similarity
Figure 8: Similarity matrix of embeddings trained using
a) BCE, b) BCE+Contrastive loss, and c) no text encoder.
Table 9: Measuring embedding quality across different
loss functions.
Lower MSE and Frobenius-norm dis-
tances (to the identity) indicate embeddings closer to the
ideal diagonal (better separation).
Eval
Image
Image
Image+Text
Image+Text
Loss
BCE
BCE+Contr.
BCE
BCE+Contr.
MSE (↓)
0.6495
0.6179
0.8426
0.1801
Fro dist. (↓)
14.5060
14.1497
16.5227
7.6387
Pre-trained
Fine-tuned (all failures)
Fine-tuned (RoboMD failures)
Failures
Best possible
1.3GB
9.0GB
Figure 9: Failure distribution before and
after fine-tuning. Observe reduction in
error modes. Dashed black line repre-
sents no failure. Refer Table 5.
guided fine-tuning. Beyond qualitative improvements, Table 5 quantitatively demonstrates that fine-
tuning with RoboMD-selected failures achieves a significant accuracy gain of 92.83%, outperform-
ing fine-tuning on randomly selected failures (85.48%) while using substantially less data.
Importantly, RoboMD-guided fine-tuning requires only 1.3 GB of targeted failure data, compared
to 9.0 GB when fine-tuning on all known failures. This highlights that πMD does not merely expose
failure modes, but also prioritizes the most informative failures for policy adaptation. Consequently,
RoboMD enables efficient, targeted fine-tuning that improves robustness under constrained data
collection budgets.
5
CONCLUSION
This paper introduced RoboMD, a framework that recasts the diagnosis of robot manipulation fail-
ures from a process of manual heuristics into an active, sequential search problem solved by deep
reinforcement learning. By training a diagnostic agent to systematically seek out failure-inducing
conditions, RoboMD provides a principled approach to uncovering policy weaknesses. Our key con-
tribution, lifting this search into a continuous vision-language embedding space enables the RL agent
to generalize its diagnosis, successfully identifying and ranking subtle failure modes in both seen
and previously unseen environmental conditions. Our extensive experiments validate this methodol-
ogy, demonstrating that RoboMD significantly outperforms static VLM baselines, small models and
alternative RL methods in diagnostic accuracy. We also showed that the identified failures provide
an actionable path to enhancing policy robustness, allowing for targeted fine-tuning that measur-
ably improves performance in high-risk scenarios at a fraction of data cost. Beyond debugging,
RoboMD offers a practical foundation for integration into continuous testing pipelines, enabling
automated regression testing as policies evolve. Future work will focus on scaling this approach to
create generalist diagnostic agents capable of evaluating multi-task policies across even broader and
more unstructured environment distributions, a crucial step toward the deployment of truly reliable
and trustworthy robotic systems in the real world.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
6
ETHICS STATEMENT
This work adheres to the ICLR Code of Ethics. Our research does not involve human subjects,
personally identifiable data, or sensitive information. All datasets used are publicly available and
licensed for research purposes. We have made sure that our methods and results are reported hon-
estly, transparently, and reproducibly. The potential societal impacts of this work were considered,
and our contributions align very well with responsible and beneficial use of safe machine learning
model deployment.
7
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We have taken several measures to ensure the reproducibility of our work. An anonymous GitHub
repository is provided that contains all the necessary scripts to reproduce the experiments and re-
sults. The simulation data used in this study is publicly available. For real-world experiments, we
employ a commonly used UR5 robotic arm setup, whose specifications and control interface are well
documented. Detailed experimental setup is provided in the Appendix C. Together, these resources
allow independent researchers to fully replicate our results.
REFERENCES
Christopher Agia, Rohan Sinha, Jingyun Yang, Zi-ang Cao, Rika Antonova, Marco Pavone, and
Jeannette Bohg. Unpacking failure modes of generative policies: Runtime monitoring of consis-
tency and progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04640, 2024.
OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al.
Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
2020.
Andrea Bajcsy and Jaime F Fisac. Human-ai safety: A descendant of generative ai and control
systems safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09794, 2024.
Johan Bjorck, Fernando Casta˜neda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan,
Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model
for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734, 2025.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo
Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow
model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Daniel Brown, Russell Coleman, Ravi Srinivasan, and Scott Niekum. Safe imitation learning via fast
bayesian reward inference from preferences. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 1165–1177. PMLR, 2020.
Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake,
and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research, pp. 02783649241273668, 2023.
Anthony Corso, Robert Moss, Mark Koren, Ritchie Lee, and Mykel Kochenderfer. A survey of algo-
rithms for black-box safety validation of cyber-physical systems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 72:377–428, 2021.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Harrison Delecki, Masha Itkina, Bernard Lange, Ransalu Senanayake, and Mykel J Kochenderfer.
How do we fail? stress testing perception in autonomous vehicles. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5139–5146. IEEE, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2020.
Jiafei Duan, Wilbert Pumacay, Nishanth Kumar, Yi Ru Wang, Shulin Tian, Wentao Yuan, Ranjay
Krishna, Dieter Fox, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yijie Guo. Aha: A vision-language-model for detecting
and reasoning over failures in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00371, 2024.
Haoquan Fang, Markus Grotz, Wilbert Pumacay, Yi Ru Wang, Dieter Fox, Ranjay Krishna, and
Jiafei Duan. Sam2act: Integrating visual foundation model with a memory architecture for robotic
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18564, 2025.
Alec Farid, David Snyder, Allen Z Ren, and Anirudha Majumdar. Failure prediction with statistical
guarantees for vision-based robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05894, 2022.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
exploration. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.
Alkis Gotovos, Nathalie Casati, Gregory Hitz, and Andreas Krause. Active learning for level set
estimation. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2013.
Philipp Grimmeisen, Friedrich Sautter, and Andrey Morozov. Concept: Dynamic risk assessment
for ai-controlled robotic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14147, 2024.
Qiao Gu, Yuanliang Ju, Shengxiang Sun, Igor Gilitschenski, Haruki Nishimura, Masha Itkina, and
Florian Shkurti.
Safe: Multitask failure detection for vision-language-action models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.09937, 2025.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Zhang-Wei Hong, Idan Shenfeld, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Aldo Pareja, James Glass,
Akash Srivastava, and Pulkit Agrawal. Curiosity-driven red-teaming for large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19464, 2024.
Wonseok Jeon, Seokin Seo, and Kee-Eung Kim. A bayesian approach to generative adversarial
imitation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Yiding Jiang, J Zico Kolter, and Roberta Raileanu. On the importance of exploration for generaliza-
tion in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer
vision? Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Lukas Klein, Kenza Amara, Carsten T L¨uth, Hendrik Strobelt, Mennatallah El-Assady, and Paul F
Jaeger. Interactive semantic interventions for vlms: A human-in-the-loop investigation of vlm
failure. In NeurIPS Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024, 2024.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169, 2021.
Fanqi Lin, Yingdong Hu, Pingyue Sheng, Chuan Wen, Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Data scaling
laws in imitation learning for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18647, 2024.
Zeyi Liu, Arpit Bahety, and Shuran Song.
Reflect: Summarizing robot experiences for failure
explanation and correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15724, 2023.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei.
Learn-
ing to generalize across long-horizon tasks from human demonstrations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.06085, 2020.
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın. What matters in learning from offline
human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
Ajay Mandlekar, Soroush Nasiriany, Bowen Wen, Iretiayo Akinola, Yashraj Narang, Linxi Fan,
Yuke Zhu, and Dieter Fox. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using
human demonstrations. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Volodymyr Mnih.
Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.01783, 2016.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
Theory and application to reward shaping. In ICML, volume 99, pp. 278–287, 1999.
Julia Nitsch, Masha Itkina, Ransalu Senanayake, Juan Nieto, Max Schmidt, Roland Siegwart,
Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Cesar Cadena.
Out-of-distribution detection for automotive per-
ception. In 2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp.
2938–2943. IEEE, 2021.
Simon T O’Callaghan and Fabio T Ramos. Gaussian process occupancy maps. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 31(1):42–62, 2012.
Wilbert Pumacay, Ishika Singh, Jiafei Duan, Ranjay Krishna, Jesse Thomason, and Dieter Fox. The
colosseum: A benchmark for evaluating generalization for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.08191, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Deepak Ramachandran and Eyal Amir. Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. In IJCAI, vol-
ume 7, pp. 2586–2591, 2007.
Allen Z Ren and Anirudha Majumdar. Distributionally robust policy learning via adversarial envi-
ronment generation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):1379–1386, 2022.
Som Sagar, Aditya Taparia, and Ransalu Senanayake. Failures are fated, but can be faded: Char-
acterizing and mitigating unwanted behaviors in large-scale vision and language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.07145, 2024.
Lindsay Sanneman and Julie A Shah. The situation awareness framework for explainable ai (safe-
ai) and human factors considerations for xai systems. International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, 38(18-20):1772–1788, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ransalu Senanayake. The role of predictive uncertainty and diversity in embodied ai and robot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03164, 2024.
Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma,
Adil Zouitine, Michel Aractingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, et al.
Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.
Rakshith Subramanyam, Kowshik Thopalli, Vivek Narayanaswamy, and Jayaraman J Thiagarajan.
Decider: Leveraging foundation model priors for improved model failure detection and explana-
tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 465–482. Springer, 2025.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jayaraman J Thiagarajan, Vivek Narayanaswamy, Puja Trivedi, and Rushil Anirudh.
Pager: A
framework for failure analysis of deep regression models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10977,
2023.
Jana Tmov, Luis I Reyes Castro, Sertac Karaman, Emilio Frazzoli, and Daniela Rus. Minimum-
violation ltl planning with conflicting specifications. In 2013 American Control Conference, pp.
200–205. IEEE, 2013.
Joseph A Vincent, Haruki Nishimura, Masha Itkina, and Mac Schwager. Full-distribution general-
ization bounds for imitation learning policies. In First Workshop on Out-of-Distribution Gener-
alization in Robotics at CoRL 2023, 2023.
Annie Xie, Lisa Lee, Ted Xiao, and Chelsea Finn. Decomposing the generalization gap in imitation
learning for visual robotic manipulation. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 3153–3160. IEEE, 2024.
Chen Xu, Tony Khuong Nguyen, Emma Dixon, Christopher Rodriguez, Patrick Miller, Robert Lee,
Paarth Shah, Rares Ambrus, Haruki Nishimura, and Masha Itkina. Can we detect failures without
failure data? uncertainty-aware runtime failure detection for imitation learning policies. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.08558, 2025.
Heng Yang, Jingnan Shi, and Luca Carlone. Teaser: Fast and certifiable point cloud registration.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 37(2):314–333, 2020.
Yifan Zhou, Shubham Sonawani, Mariano Phielipp, Simon Stepputtis, and Heni Ben Amor. Modu-
larity through attention: Efficient training and transfer of language-conditioned policies for robot
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04573, 2022.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush Nasiri-
any, and Yifeng Zhu.
robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
A
PROOFS OF THEORETICAL GUARANTEES
Theorem 1 (Advantage Invariance in a Semantic Potential Field). Let πMD be the policy for the
MDP defined in Section 3. Let the continuous action space be structured by the embedding e, which
is trained via the contrastive loss L (Eq. 2) to function as a potential function, Φ(s) = es. The
search performed by πMD in this space is equivalent to learning in a shaped MDP where the implicit
shaping function is F(s, a, s′) = γΦ(s′) −Φ(s). For this process, the following hold:
(i) Optimality: Any optimal policy in the shaped MDP is also optimal in the original MDP.
(ii) Advantage Invariance: A∗(s, a)shaped = A∗(s, a)original.
Proof. The proof relies on the established theory of potential-based reward shaping Ng et al. (1999).
Let the original MDP be M with reward function R(s, a, s′) and the shaped MDP be M ′ with reward
function R′(s, a, s′) = R(s, a, s′)+F(s, a, s′), where F(s, a, s′) = γΦ(s′)−Φ(s) is the potential-
based shaping reward.
The optimal Q-function in the original MDP, Q∗
M, satisfies the Bellman optimality equation:
Q∗
M(s, a) = Es′∼Psa(·)[R(s, a, s′) + γ max
a′ Q∗
M(s′, a′)]
Now, consider a transformed Q-function, ˆQ(s, a) = Q∗
M(s, a) −Φ(s). We can show that it satisfies
the Bellman equation for the shaped MDP, M ′:
ˆQ(s, a) + Φ(s) = Es′∼Psa(·)[R(s, a, s′) + γ max
a′ ( ˆQ(s′, a′) + Φ(s′))]
ˆQ(s, a) = Es′∼Psa(·)[R(s, a, s′) −Φ(s) + γΦ(s′) + γ max
a′
ˆQ(s′, a′)]
= Es′∼Psa(·)[R(s, a, s′) + F(s, a, s′) + γ max
a′
ˆQ(s′, a′)]
= Es′∼Psa(·)[R′(s, a, s′) + γ max
a′
ˆQ(s′, a′)]
This is precisely the Bellman optimality equation for M ′. By the uniqueness of the optimal Q-
function, it must be that Q∗
M ′(s, a) = ˆQ(s, a) = Q∗
M(s, a) −Φ(s).
(i) Proof of Optimality: An optimal policy π∗is one that acts greedily with respect to the optimal
Q-function. For the shaped MDP, the optimal policy is:
π∗
M ′(s) = arg max
a
Q∗
M ′(s, a)
= arg max
a (Q∗
M(s, a) −Φ(s))
Since Φ(s) does not depend on the action a, it does not change the argmax. Therefore:
π∗
M ′(s) = arg max
a
Q∗
M(s, a) = π∗
M(s)
Thus, any optimal policy for the shaped MDP is also optimal for the original MDP.
(ii) Proof of Advantage Invariance: The advantage function is defined as A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −
V (s), where V (s) = maxa Q(s, a). Using the relationship derived above:
V ∗
M ′(s) = max
a
Q∗
M ′(s, a) = max
a (Q∗
M(s, a) −Φ(s)) = (max
a
Q∗
M(s, a)) −Φ(s) = V ∗
M(s) −Φ(s)
Now, we can write the advantage function for the shaped MDP:
A∗
M ′(s, a) = Q∗
M ′(s, a) −V ∗
M ′(s)
= (Q∗
M(s, a) −Φ(s)) −(V ∗
M(s) −Φ(s))
= Q∗
M(s, a) −V ∗
M(s) = A∗
M(s, a)
This proves that the advantage function is invariant under potential-based reward shaping.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Theorem 2 (Sample-Efficient Boundary Exploration). Let actions a ∈A be mapped by an L-
Lipschitz embedding e(a). If πMD is trained with reward R(a) = Rtask(a)+βH(a) for β > 0, where
H(a) is predictive uncertainty, then: (i) R(a) is Lipschitz, yielding stable gradients for PPO; (ii)
exploration concentrates near the success/failure boundary, identifying it to precision ϵ with rollouts
polynomial in 1/ϵ.
Lemma 1 (Lipschitzness of the shaped reward). Let e : A →E be Le-Lipschitz. Assume Rtask :
E →R and H : E →R are LRtask- and LH-Lipschitz, respectively. For β > 0, define R(a) =
Rtask(e(a)) + β H(e(a)). Then R is Lipschitz on A with constant
LR ≤Le
 LRtask + βLH

.
Proof. For any a1, a2 ∈A,
|R(a1) −R(a2)| =
Rtask(e(a1)) −Rtask(e(a2)) + β
 H(e(a1)) −H(e(a2))

≤|Rtask(e(a1)) −Rtask(e(a2))| + β |H(e(a1)) −H(e(a2))|
≤LRtask ∥e(a1) −e(a2)∥+ βLH ∥e(a1) −e(a2)∥
≤
 LRtask + βLH

Le ∥a1 −a2∥.
Thus R is Lipschitz with the stated constant.
Standing assumptions.
Let p(a) = Pr[failure | a] denote the classifier’s predicted probability.
Assume:
A1 (Calibration + smoothness) p is calibrated and Lp-Lipschitz in e(a).
A2 (Regular boundary) There exist r0 > 0 and κ > 0 such that for all a with dist(a, ∂S) ≤r0,
p(a) −1
2
 ≥κ dist(a, ∂S), where ∂S = {a : p(a) = 1
2}.
Lemma 2 (Uncertainty maximization at/near the boundary). Let H(a) = −p(a) log p(a) −(1 −
p(a)) log(1 −p(a)) be the predictive entropy. Under (A1)–(A2), there exist constants cH > 0 and
r0 > 0 such that for all a with dist(a, ∂S) ≤r0,
H(a) ≤log 2 −cH
 p(a) −1
2
2
≤log 2 −cH κ2 dist(a, ∂S)2,
and consequently H achieves its maxima on ∂S and decays quadratically away from it in distance.
Proof. The binary entropy h(p) = −p log p −(1 −p) log(1 −p) is strictly concave. It attains its
maximum at p = 1
2 with value h(1/2) = log 2, and satisfies h′(1/2) = 0 and h′′(1/2) = −4. By
Taylor’s theorem, for p in a neighborhood of 1
2 there exists a constant cH ∈(0, 2] such that
h(p) ≤log 2 −cH (p −1
2)2.
Applying this with p = p(a) gives
H(a) ≤log 2 −cH (p(a) −1
2)2.
Moreover, Assumption (A2) states that whenever dist(a, ∂S) ≤r0,
|p(a) −1
2| ≥κ dist(a, ∂S).
Combining the two inequalities yields
H(a) ≤log 2 −cHκ2 dist(a, ∂S)2.
Thus H(a) is maximized on the boundary ∂S and decays quadratically with distance away from
it.
Lemma 3 (Sample complexity of boundary identification). Suppose f(a) := p(a) −1
2 admits a
Gaussian process (GP) surrogate with kernel k, and let γT denote the maximal information gain
after T queries for k. Consider active sampling driven by the shaped reward R = Rtask + βH
with β > 0. Then there exists a constant C > 0 such that, with high probability, the zero level set
{a : f(a) = 0} (i.e., the boundary) is identified to Hausdorff precision ϵ after at most
T ≤C γT log T
ϵ2
queries.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof sketch. Under (A1)–(A2), Lemma 2 shows that, in a neighborhood of the boundary, entropy
H is a smooth, strictly decreasing function of |f(a)| and is maximized where f(a) = 0. Hence
maximizing βH is equivalent (up to smooth monotone reparameterization) to prioritizing high pos-
terior uncertainty on the sign of f near its zero level set, as in standard level-set acquisitions (e.g.,
straddle/variance/ambiguity criteria).
For a GP posterior, uniform confidence bands |f(a) −µT −1(a)| ≤α1/2
T σT −1(a) hold with high
probability. Sampling high-variance points in the ambiguous band around f = 0 shrinks that band
until its thickness is O(ϵ). The cumulative posterior variance is controlled by the information gain
γT , which yields
T = O
γT log T
ϵ2

for ϵ-accurate recovery of the zero level set; see, e.g., Theorem 1 of Gotovos et al. (2013). Finally,
since H and these ambiguity/variance scores agree up to a smooth monotone transform near the
boundary (Lemma 2), the same rate applies to the βH-driven policy.
Proof of Theorem 2. Part (i): By Lemma 1, R is Lipschitz with constant LR ≤Le(LRtask + βLH),
which yields bounded PPO gradients.
Part (ii): By Lemma 2, H is maximized on (and decays away from) the decision boundary, so the βH
term concentrates exploration in an O(ϵ) tube around it. Lemma 3 then gives the T = O
  γT log T
ϵ2

rollout bound to achieve precision ϵ.
Theorem 3 (Convergence Acceleration Due to Potential Field). Let PPO train a critic with Bell-
man updates of the form ∥ξt+1∥∞≤γ∥ξt∥∞+ ϵ with critic error e and approximation error ϵ. If
potential shaping induces a transformed critic with smaller initialization error ξ′
0 < ξ0 and smaller
approximation error ϵ′ < ϵ, then for any ε > ϵ′/(1 −γ) with discount factor γ, the shaped critic
reaches ∥ξ′
T ∥∞≤ε in fewer iterations than the unshaped critic.
Proof. Unroll the linear recursions. For any t ≥0,
∥ξt∥∞≤γtξ0 + 1 −γt
1 −γ ϵ =
ϵ
1 −γ + γt

ξ0 −
ϵ
1 −γ

,
(1)
and similarly
∥ξ′
t∥∞≤γtξ′
0 + 1 −γt
1 −γ ϵ′ =
ϵ′
1 −γ + γK

ξ′
0 −
ϵ′
1 −γ

.
(2)
Define the minimal hitting times for a target tolerance ε > 0:
τ := min{t ∈N : ∥ξt∥∞≤ε},
τ ′ := min{t ∈N : ∥ξ′
t∥∞≤ε}.
From e′
0 < e0 and ϵ′ < ϵ and the positivity of the coefficients γt and 1−γt
1−γ for t ≥0, we have the
pointwise strict inequality
γtξ′
0 + 1 −γt
1 −γ ϵ′ < γtξ0 + 1 −γt
1 −γ ϵ
for all t ≥0,
(3)
i.e., the shaped upper bound is strictly below the unshaped one at every t.
Now fix any ε > ϵ′/(1 −γ). By (2), there exists a finite t with ∥ξ′
t∥∞≤ε, so τ ′ is finite. If the
unshaped process is also able to reach ε (i.e., τ < ∞), then from (1)–(3) we get
∥ξ′
τ∥∞≤γτξ′
0 + 1 −γτ
1 −γ ϵ′ < γτξ0 + 1 −γτ
1 −γ ϵ ≤ε,
which implies τ ′ ≤τ.
Moreover, strict inequality of the shaped bound (3) together with minimality of τ implies that either
τ ′ = τ −1 (or smaller) or, in the degenerate case that ε ≥∥ξ0∥∞, both processes already satisfy the
target at t = 0. Hence, whenever the unshaped process requires at least one update to reach ε (i.e.,
τ ≥1), we have τ ′ < τ.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 10: CNN Confusion matrix
percentages (%)
Task
TP
FN
TN
FP
Square
39
61
74
26
Can
7
93
92
8
Lift
8
92
87
13
Table 11:
ResNet-18 Confusion
matrix percentages (%)
Task
TP
FN
TN
FP
Square
60
40
34
66
Can
10
90
84
16
Lift
47
53
51
49
B
DISCUSSION: FAILURES, OOD, AND NEURAL NETWORK BASELINES
Failures arise both in OOD and in-distribution scenarios, so OOD detectors alone cannot serve as
comprehensive failure detectors. While OOD methods can detect novel textures or extreme lighting
they miss subtle perturbations that actually cause policy failures. We evaluated two lightweight
visual detectors a three layer CNN and a halved-channel ResNet-18 on our collected success–failure
frames from the square, can and lift tasks. Table 10 and Table 11 report confusion matrix rates: the
CNN achieves true-positive rates of 39 %, 7 % and 8 % with false-positive rates of 26 %, 8 % and
13 %; ResNet-18 reaches true-positives of 60 %, 10 % and 47 % with false-positives of 66 %, 16 %
and 49 %. These low true-positive and high false-positive rates show that standalone OOD detectors
lack the sensitivity and specificity needed for reliable failure detection in robotic tasks.
As a sanity check on representational capacity, we evaluated the same two models on a balanced set
of nominal versus failure-mode frames exhibiting minor lighting shifts, small object-size changes
and novel cube/table colors (see Table 1). Both models were trained for 200 epochs on 84×84
RGB inputs normalized to [0,1]. Neither exceeded chance accuracy (≈50 %) at ranking failures
and success on these fine-grained perturbations. This confirms that low-capacity visual encoders
cannot disentangle subtle failure cues, motivating our policy-centric, multimodal RoboMD frame-
work, which leverages semantic embeddings to rank and generalize failure modes under targeted
perturbations.
Square
Pick Place
Lift
Task
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Failure Mode Detection Accuracy per Task
CNN
ResNet
A2C
PPO
SAC
Qwen2 VL
Gemini 1.5 Pro
GPT 4o
GPT 4o (ICL_5_Shot)
Figure 11: Testing Robustness Under Visual Perturbations: Successful Rollout in Training vs. Fail-
ure Induced by Red Table Distraction
The CNN encoder comprised two convolutional layers (3→32→64 channels, 5×5 kernels, stride
2, ReLU), followed by flattening and a 128-dimensional binary classification head. The ResNet-18
variant retained the original residual block design but halved all channel widths (16→32→64→128),
applied global average pooling, and used a 64-dimensional classification layer.
Failure detection in robotic systems can be broadly categorized into three approaches:
1. Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Detection. These methods model the distribution of nominal
training data and flag inputs that deviate from it. They are commonly used for runtime
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
monitoring in perception and control pipelines Xu et al. (2025). However, not all OOD
inputs lead to failures, and many failures occur within the training distribution, limiting
their coverage.
2. Supervised Failure Prediction. A classifier or regressor is trained on labeled success and
failure data to directly predict task outcomes Gu et al. (2025). This approach can capture
both in-distribution and OOD failures if represented in the dataset, but its performance
depends heavily on the diversity and completeness of observed failure modes.
3. Active Failure Search and Stress Testing. Instead of passively predicting failures, these
methods actively probe the robot or its environment to discover vulnerabilities. Tech-
niques include adversarial perturbations, domain randomization, and reinforcement learn-
ing–based exploration. This paradigm aims to uncover unseen and rare failure modes by
systematically searching high-risk regions of the state or environment space.
C
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
C.1
COMPUTING RESOURCES
All model training was performed on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU (80 GB HBM2), with peak GPU
memory usage of approximately 60 GB. We used mixed-precision (FP16) training under PyTorch
2.0 and CUDA 11.8 to maximize throughput. Full training (one tasks) required roughly 12 hours on
this setup.
For inference, the model’s footprint falls well below 16 GB of GPU memory, so it can be deployed
on a wide range of hardware (e.g., NVIDIA A100 40 GB, RTX 3090) without requiring an H100-
class device. All experiments ran on an Ubuntu 22.04 server with 256 GB of system RAM and dual
Intel Xeon CPUs.
C.2
REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENT SETUP
Real-world experiments were conducted using a UR5e robotic arm equipped with high-resolution
cameras and a standardized workspace. The setup is shown below in Fig 12.
Figure 12: Scenes from experiments on real world robot
C.3
SIMULATION EXPERIMENT SETUP
Simulation experiments were performed using the MuJoCo physics engine integrated with Robo-
suite. The simulated environments included variations in object positions, shapes, and textures. The
simulation allowed extensive testing across diverse scenarios. Below we show a few samples in
Fig 13.
C.4
SEMANTIC SPACE TRAINING
For image encoding, we adopt the Vision Transformer Base (ViT-B/16) architecture from Torchvi-
sion, pretrained on the ImageNet-1k dataset (IMAGENET1K V1 weights). The original classifica-
tion head is replaced with a linear projection to a 512-dimensional latent space.
For text encoding, we employ the CLIP text transformer from OpenAI’s ViT-B/32 model, which
provides contextual embeddings of action descriptions. Unlike the vision branch of CLIP, which is
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 13: Scenes from experiments on Robosuite
substituted with our ViT-B/16 encoder, the text branch is fine-tuned jointly with the image encoder
to learn a shared semantic embedding space.
D
BASELINES
To validate the effectiveness of our method, we compared it against two categories of baselines:
Reinforcement Learning (RL) baselines and Vision-Language Model (VLM) baselines. Below, we
detail their implementation, hyperparameters, and specific configurations.
D.1
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (RL) BASELINES
The RL baselines were implemented using well-established algorithms, each optimized for the task
to ensure a fair comparison. The following RL methods were included:
• Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO): A policy-gradient method known for its stability
and efficiency. Key hyperparameters included:
– Learning rate: 3 × 10−4
– Discount factor (γ): 0.99
– Clipping parameter (ϵ): 0.2
– Number of epochs: 10
– Batch size: 64
– Actor-Critic network layers: [128, 256, 128]
• Soft Actor-Critic (SAC): A model-free off-policy algorithm optimized for continuous ac-
tion spaces. The key hyperparameters were:
– Learning rate: 1 × 10−3
– Discount factor (γ): 0.99
– Replay buffer size: 1 × 106
– Target entropy: −dim(action space)
– Batch size: 128
• Advantage Actor Critic (A2C):
– Learning rate: 2.5 × 10−4
– Discount factor (γ): 0.99
– Exploration strategy: Epsilon-greedy (ϵ decayed from 1.0 to 0.1 over 500,000 steps)
– Replay buffer size: 1 × 106
– Batch size: 64
– Neural network layers: [128, 256, 128]
Each RL baseline was evaluated using the same metrics, ensuring consistency across comparisons.
D.2
VISION-LANGUAGE MODEL (VLM) BASELINES
The VLM baselines take advantage of the interplay between visual and textual modalities for task
representation. We evaluated 3 state-of-the-art VLMs adapted to our task:
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
t = 0
t = 20
t = 40
t = 60
Training 
Configuration
(Success)
Perturbed 
Configuration
(Failure)
Figure 14: Testing Robustness Under Visual Perturbations: Successful Rollout in Training vs. Fail-
ure Induced by Red Table Distraction
1. GPT-4o
2. Gemini 1.5 Pro
3. Qwen2-VL
Additionally, we leverage GPT-4o with in-context learning, using five demonstrations. First, we
process the output trajectories into videos and compute the appropriate frame rate to generate video
sequences equivalent to 15 frames per trajectory pair. These sequences, representing perturbation
scenarios, are provided to the VLMs along with a system prompt that includes a detailed policy
description, training configuration, and a natural language task description. For evaluation, we
structure the testing dataset using a pairwise comparison framework, where each model is prompted
to assess two input video sequences and rank which is more likely to result in task success. The
results are recorded in a CSV file, and we compute comparison scores by analyzing model rankings
against ground-truth rollouts in the simulated perturbation.
E
RATIONALE FOR USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
RL is employed in the RoboMD framework due to its ability to explore high-dimensional, complex
action spaces and optimize sequential decision-making under uncertainty. This section outlines the
key motivations for choosing RL as the core methodology:
Exploration of High-Risk Scenarios: Traditional approaches to analyzing robot policy failures
often rely on deterministic sampling or exhaustive evaluation, which become infeasible in large,
dynamic environments. RL allows targeted exploration by learning an agent that actively seeks out
environmental configurations likely to induce policy failures. This capability is particularly useful
for systematically uncovering vulnerabilities in high-dimensional environments.
Optimization of Failure Discovery: The objective of RoboMD is to maximize the occurrence of
failures in pre-trained policies. RL frameworks, such as PPO, are well-suited for this task as they
iteratively refine policies to achieve specific goals, such as identifying high-risk states. The reward
function incentivizes the agent to find configurations where the manipulation policy fails by going
through multiple actions to induce failures. Fig 14 shows several steps of the manipulation policy
rollout.
Comparison with Alternative Methods: While other methods, such as supervised learning or
heuristic-based exploration, can provide valuable insights into specific failure cases, they are limited
in their scope and adaptability. Supervised learning approaches rely heavily on labeled data, which
is challenging to obtain for failure analysis, particularly for rare or unseen failure modes. These
methods also lack the ability to adapt dynamically to changes in the environment, reducing their
effectiveness in exploring novel or complex failure scenarios. Similarly, heuristic-based exploration
methods, such as grid search or predefined sampling strategies, can identify failure cases under con-
trolled conditions but struggle to generalize in high-dimensional environments where the space of
possible failure configurations is vast. These methods are also constrained by their reliance on static,
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
0
4
8
12
17
Figure 15: The order in which the confusion matrix is a) Image Ecoder + BCE b) Image + Text
Encoder + BCE loss c) Image Encoder + BCE + Contrastive loss d) Image + Text Encoder + BCE +
Contrastive loss
predefined rules, which often fail to capture the intricate interactions between environmental factors
and failure likelihoods. In contrast, reinforcement learning excels in scenarios where exploration
and generalization are critical.
F
CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE EMBEDDING
Embedding actions in a continuous space is crucial for efficiently capturing the underlying structure
of decision-making processes. Unlike discrete action spaces, where each action is treated as an inde-
pendent category, continuous action space embeddings aim to encode similarities and relationships
between actions in a structured space.
Table 12: Actions for Can and Box tasks.
Task
Action Description
Can
Change the can color to red.
Change the can color to green.
Change the can color to blue.
Change the can color to grey.
Box
Change the box color to green.
Change the box color to blue.
Change the box color to red.
Box Sizes
Resize the box to 0.3 × 0.3 × 0.02 (L, B, H).
Resize the box to 0.2 × 0.2 × 0.02 (L, B, H).
Resize the box to 0.1 × 0.1 × 0.02 (L, B, H).
F.1
ACTION DESCRIPTION MAPPING FOR CLIP LANGUAGE INPUT
To generate language inputs for CLIP, we use a mapped dictionary that encodes the action being
applied to the image. The action descriptions for different tasks are detailed in Table 12. This table
represents only a subset of possible actions, and users are free to modify the language as needed. The
descriptions are not strict requirements, as the model learns over time to associate text and images
with failure patterns, allowing for flexibility in phrasing while maintaining the underlying semantic
meaning. The actions used for Lift task is as follows which was also shown as (A1,A2...A21) in
Fig 9.
F.2
EVALUATION
Fig. 9 shows the failure distribution in the Lift environment under 21 independent perturbations.
These include 4 cube colors, 4 table colors, 3 cube sizes, 2 table sizes, 4 robot colors, and 4 lighting
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
conditions. Fig 15 illustrates the similarity structure of embeddings trained using only Binary Cross-
Entropy (BCE) loss, resulting in highly correlated representations. In contrast, the right matrix,
trained with a combination of BCE and Contrastive Loss, demonstrates improved separation, as
evidenced by the stronger diagonal structure and reduced off-diagonal similarities.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Number of Neighbors (k)
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Epoch
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Loss
Image-Only Backbone
Image+Text Backbone
Figure 16: kNN Accuracy Drop with Increasing k in Continuous Action Space Embeddings (left).
Training loss for training action representations (right)
To assess the quality of the learned embeddings, we conduct an evaluation using a k-Nearest Neigh-
bors (kNN) classifier. Specifically, we train kNN on a subset of the embeddings and analyze the
impact of increasing k on test accuracy. The intuition behind this evaluation is that well-separated
embeddings should be locally consistent, meaning that a small k (considering only close neighbors)
should yield high accuracy, while increasing k (incorporating more distant neighbors) may introduce
noise and reduce accuracy as shown in Fig 16.
F.3
INTEGRATING VISUAL AND TEXTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
Incorporating a textual backbone alongside the image backbone yielded significantly lower loss
values and faster convergence compared to using an image-only backbone.
This improvement can be attributed to several factors:
1. Semantic Guidance: Textual representations carry rich semantic information that can guide
the image backbone. Instead of relying solely on visual cues, the model gains an additional
perspective on the underlying concepts (e.g., object names, attributes, or relations).
2. Improved Discriminative Power: With access to text-based information, the model can
differentiate between visually similar classes by leveraging linguistic differences in their
corresponding textual descriptions.
3. Faster Convergence: Because textual features often come from large, pretrained language
models, they are already highly informative.
Injecting these features into the training
pipeline accelerates the learning process, reducing the number of iterations needed to reach
a satisfactory level of performance.
G
FINE-TUNING
Once failure modes are identified, we empirically found that the most effective strategy for fine-
tuning the manipulation policy, πR, is to use all selected failure samples together rather than it-
eratively adapting to subsets (Fig. 17). To adapt πR against identified failures, we target specific
environment variations that a user wishes to improve. As shown in Table 13, fine-tuning with the
high-likelihood samples provided by πMD yields the highest accuracy. We then fine-tune πR on
the combined set of targeted samples, ensuring corrections for critical failures (Fig. 18). Notably,
fine-tuning on a large set of failure modes also leads to accuracy improvements. When computa-
tional resources permit, fine-tuning on all identified failures may be also effective; however, when
resources are constrained, leveraging RoboMD to select the most informative subset provides an
efficient and robust strategy for policy adaptation.
G.1
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Train: No Color
FT: Blue
FT: Blue
Green
FT: Blue
Green
Red
Train: All Colors
FT: All Colors
FT: Red
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Task: Lift, Algo: BC
Train: No color
FT: Blue
FT: Blue
Green
FT: Blue
Green
Red
Train: All Colors
FT: All Colors
FT: Red
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Task: Lift, Algo: Diffusion
Default Table
Blue Table
Green Table
Red Table
Figure 17: Performance comparison of behavior cloning (BC) and diffusion-based policies on the
Lift task before and after fine-tuning with failure-inducing samples. Each bar represents the success
rate of the policy across different table colors.
Default
Color 1
Color 2
Color 3
Color 4
Color 5
Color 6
Color 7
Color 8
Color 9
Color 10
Color 11
Table Color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Figure 18: BC lift finetuned on a combined dataset of 12 different Table colors
Table 13: Evaluation of Fine-Tuning Approaches on Failure-Targeted Data.
Fine-tuning (FT)
Accuracy
Mean Square
Wasserstein
Chi-Square
FT Dataset
Strategies
%(↑)
Distance (↓)
Error (↓)
Size
Size
Pre-trained
67.91
0.377
0.005
0.016
–
FT with RoboMD
92.83
0.033
0.001
0.001
1.29GB
FT with 1 failure
71.25
0.068
0.002
0.003
0.43GB
FT with 2 failure
75.83
0.140
0.003
0.006
0.86GB
FT with 3 failure
75.41
0.050
0.002
0.002
1.29GB
FT with 4 failure
80.00
0.128
0.002
0.005
1.72GB
FT with 5 failure
81.25
0.337
0.004
0.014
2.15GB
FT with 6 failure
64.76
0.201
0.003
0.008
2.58GB
FT with all failure
85.48
0.069
0.002
0.003
9.00GB
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 19: Comparison of model robustness by measuring failure likelihood under controlled small
environmental variations.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Task: Pick Place
Sprite Bottle
Bread
Fanta Bottle
Milk Carton
Red Cuboid
Task: Square
Lighting
Table Color
Table Shape
Object Color
Object Size
Task: Pick Place
Lighting
Table Color
Table Shape
Object Color
Robot Color
Task: Threading
Lighting
Table Color
Table Shape
Gripper Color
Object Shape
Task: Stack
Lighting
Table Color
Table Shape
Cube Color
Robot Color
Task: Lift
Lighting
Table Color
Table Shape
Cube Color
Robot Color
Figure 20: Environmental and Object Perturbations on Manipulation Tasks
26