--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ANCHOR FRAME BRIDGING FOR COHERENT FIRST-
LAST FRAME VIDEO GENERATION
Xuehan Hou1 ∗
Meng Fan1,4∗
Pengchong Qiao1
Zesen Cheng1
Yian Zhao1
Lei Zhu1
Kaiwen Cheng1,4
Chang Liu5†
Jie Chen2,3,1,4†
1 School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2 School of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4 AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
5 Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
ABSTRACT
First-last frame video generation has recently gained significant attention. It en-
ables coherent motion generation between specified first and last frames. How-
ever, this approach suffers from semantic degradation in intermediate frames,
causing scene distortion and subject deformation that undermine temporal consis-
tency. To address this issue, we introduce Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB), a novel
plug-and-play method that explicitly bridges semantic continuity from boundary
frames to intermediate frames, offering training-free adaptability and generaliz-
ability. By adaptively interpolating anchor frames at temporally critical locations
exhibiting maximal semantic discontinuities, our approach effectively mitigates
semantic drift in intermediate frames. Specifically, we propose an adaptive an-
chor frame selection module, which generates text-aligned candidate frames via
frame order reversal and selects anchors based on semantic continuity. Subse-
quently, we develop anchor frame-guided generation, which leverages the selected
anchor frames to guide semantic propagation across intermediate frames, ensur-
ing consistent boundary semantics and preserving temporal coherence through-
out the video sequence. The final video is synthesized using the first frame, last
frame, selected anchor frames, and the text prompt. The results demonstrate that
our method significantly enhances the temporal consistency and overall quality of
generated videos. Specifically, when applied to the Wan2.1-I2V model, it yields
improvements of 16.58% in FVD and 10.21% in PSNR.
1
INTRODUCTION
Video generation models have shown remarkable proficiency in generating high-quality videos and
support multiple generation paradigms, including text-to-video generation Hong et al. (2023); Vil-
legas et al. (2023); Singer et al. (2023); OpenAI (2023); Zhang et al. (2024); Li et al. (2025); Yang
et al. (2025b), image-to-video generation Ho et al. (2022); Blattmann et al. (2023); Peng et al.
(2024); Yang et al. (2025a); Wang et al. (2025b); Namekata et al. (2025),etc. However, the first-last
frame video generation Wang et al. (2025a); Bytedance (2024) remains a valuable yet underex-
plored area, which involves creating a video that simulates consistent motion between the first and
last frames. Given its unique characteristics, an effective first-last frame video generation method
can serve as a powerful tool in many applications, such as video editing, physical modeling, etc.
Although it is certainly possible to train large-scale video generation models to accept specific
frames as conditions, training such a model requires too much time and economic cost. Most ex-
isting methods Bytedance (2024); Wang et al. (2025a) realize first-last frame video generation by
reusing image-to-video models, which use both first and last frames as control conditions. Despite
some success, these methods still suffer from information attenuation in intermediate frames. That
is, the deterministic semantics of the first and last frames gradually decrease as they propagate to the
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
first frame
(a)  Intermediate frame attention visualization
(b)  LPIPS similarity between the first/last frames
(c)  Vanilla method 
(d)  Our method AFB 
last frame
Frame id
Frame id
LPIPS
LPIPS
LPIPS to first frame
LPIPS to last frame
LPIPS to first frame
LPIPS to last frame
FLF2V
AFB (our method)
Figure 1: Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB) design. (a) Visualization of inter-frame attention in
video generation via DiT’s self-attention (left). Visualization of attention from the first-last frames
to each intermediate frame (right). Notably, only adjacent frames exhibit substantial inter-frame
attention values, while the first and last frames show relatively low attention to the middle frames,
suggesting that the deterministic semantics in the first-last frames gradually diminish as information
flows toward the intermediate frames. (b) Under the original method, LPIPS similarity between the
first and last frames drops suddenly in middle frames. Our AFB shows smooth similarity change
without such a drop. (c) Vanilla method’s generated videos exhibit poor middle-frame quality. (d)
Our AFB method smooths middle frames and enhances video temporal consistency.
intermediate frames. This is because, in self-attention layers, only adjacent frames have significant
inter-frame attention values, causing lower attention weights from the first/last frames to the inter-
mediate ones, as shown in Fig.1(a). This results in poor temporal consistency in the final video. As
illustrated in Fig.1(b), frames near the first frame show higher generation consistency, while those
in the mid-to-late part of the sequence show reduced coherence. Moreover, to maintain continuity
with the terminal frame, the last few frames abruptly adopt the ending frame’s attributes, causing
abrupt transitions and unstable temporal dynamics throughout the video sequence.
To this end, we propose a novel Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB) method to bridge the semantics of
the first and last frames to the intermediate frames. By strategically interpolating anchor frames at
points of continuity breaks in generated videos, this method effectively reduces mid-sequence frame
deviations and enforces controlled trajectory alignment throughout the generation process, as shown
in Fig.1(d). Our AFB operates through two core steps: adaptively selecting an appropriate anchor
frame from a candidate set, and then utilizing it to guide the generation of the final video.
Specifically, the adaptive anchor frame selection module is used to obtain anchor frames. As the
low quality of intermediate frames adversely affects subsequent frames, the initial video segments
maintain higher quality, whereas coherence breakdowns typically occur in the mid-to-late sections.
To address this issue, we reverse the order of the first and last frames, thereby obtaining a higher-
quality candidate set for anchor frame selection. We detect temporal discontinuities in the generated
video and denote the position of the most significant break as α. Empirically, such breakpoints occur
at nearly symmetric relative positions in forward and reverse generation (Appendix E). Accordingly,
we select the anchor at the mirrored position 1 −α.
After obtaining the anchor frame, we present the anchor frame guided generation to guide the
generation process using the first frame, last frame and anchor frame. The anchor frame is inserted
at the α position of the video. For the given frames (first, last and anchor frames), we apply a binary
mask and concatenate features from the first/last frames with textual features before feeding them
into the model. For other frames, we directly feed them into the model. This approach ensures the
temporal consistency and coherence of generated video maintains.
Given the lack of datasets for first-last frame video generation, we first construct a dataset comprising
436 pairs of first and last frame images along with corresponding text prompts. We then conduct both
qualitative and quantitative analyses on this dataset. We test our method on two common open source
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
I2V models: Wan2.1 and Hunyuan Video and conduct comparative experiments alongside Wan2.1-
FLF2V Wang et al. (2025a), ViBiDSampler Yang et al. (2025a), and Generative Inbetweening Wang
et al. (2025b). The results show that our method consistently outperforms the original baselines,
achieving improvements of 16.58% in FVD and 10.21% in PSNR compared to the Wan2.1-I2V. Our
main contributions are as follows:
• We introduce Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB), a method that bridges semantic continuity be-
tween first-last frames through anchor frame interpolation, mitigating intermediate distortion
and resolving temporal inconsistency in first-last frame video generation.
• AFB is a plug-and-play method that operates in two stages: adaptive anchor frame selection via
temporal continuity analysis and anchor frame-guided generation for coherent videos.
• We provide a high-quality first-last frame video generation dataset and conduct extensive experi-
ments on it. Results show that our method significantly outperforms existing methods, achieving
16.58% improvement in FVD and 10.21% in PSNR.
2
RELATED WORK
Image-to-Video Diffusion Models.
Image-to-Video Generation (I2V) focuses on generating dy-
namic video sequences from input images guided by text prompts. This approach enhances the con-
trollability of video generation by anchoring the output to a specific first frame. Existing methods,
such as I2VGen-XL Zhang et al. (2023), SVD Blattmann et al. (2023), Hunyuan Video-I2V Wei-
jie Kong et al. (2024), CogVideoX Yang et al. (2025b) and Wan2.1-I2V Wang et al. (2025a) extend
the text to video (T2V) framework to I2V by concatenating conditional latent representations with
noise latents. These methods leverage the robust prior knowledge embedded in the underlying T2V
models to achieve high-quality I2V generation. However, the incorporation of this prior knowledge
tends to render the generated videos more reliant on text rather than input images. Frames initially
resemble the input image, but gradually drift, which does not satisfy user requirements.
Video Frame Interpolation.
Video frame interpolation aims to generate appropriate intermedi-
ate frames from two boundary frames. Flow-based methods Park et al. (2020); Kong et al. (2022);
Huang et al. (2022); Li et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2025) explicitly estimate op-
tical flow or leverage flow guidance but struggle with complex extreme motions. Diffusion-based
methods have also been explored in several studies. Voleti et al. (2022); Danier et al. (2023); Jain
et al. (2024); Shen et al. (2024). Some methods employ a time-reversal strategy that fuses forward
and reverse denoising paths to ensure adherence to both first and last frames. However, when the
first and last frames differ significantly, the forward and backward paths exhibit substantial dynamic
discrepancies, causing undesirable artifacts in the fused video frames. To mitigate such discrep-
ancies, existing methods often introduce additional costs, such as multiple noise reinjections Yang
et al. (2025a), frame-level constraints Zhu et al. (2025) and extra model training Wang et al. (2025b).
This leads to significant computational overhead, compromising the system’s reasoning efficiency.
In contrast, our method AFB, which leverages an adaptive anchor frame addition strategy, transmits
the information of the first and last frames to the intermediate frames. This eliminates the need for
complex fusion steps and yields more coherent results.
First-Last Frame to Video.
First-Last Frame Video Generation (FLF2V) is a novel video genera-
tion task, which involves automatically generating coherent intermediate frames from given first-last
frames and text prompts, enabling highly controllable and consistent video generation. Make Pixels
Dance Zeng et al. (2024) first proposed a diffusion-based model architecture, which is capable of
generating videos guided by text and first-last frames, employing a strategy of concatenating the first
and last frames with zero-padding to create dynamic videos. Earlier this year, Wan2.1-FLF2V Wang
et al. (2025a) released a 14B-parameter FLF2V model, which concatenates the first and last frames
with noise and feeds them into the diffusion model via a conditional control branch. Current FLF2V
methods, fine-tuned from I2V models, suffer from weakened first-last frames semantics in interme-
diate frames. To mitigate this problem, we propose the Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB) to explicitly
enhance the propagation of the semantics of the first and last frames, thereby significantly improving
the consistency and video quality of first-last frame video generation.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: Method architecture. (a) Adaptive Anchor Frame Selection: Text prompts generated
by Qwen, along with the swapped first and last frames, are fed into the video generation model to
produce the anchor frame candidate set. Then we use the adaptive anchor frame selection method
to select the anchor frame. (b) Anchor Frame Guided Generation: The first frame, last frame and
anchor frame are concatenated with zero-padded frames along the time axis. The indicator guides
the model’s input conditions and specifies which frames will be generate. After denoising and
decoding, we obtain the final video with high consistency to the first and last frames.
3
METHOD
To address the information attenuation in intermediate frames, we propose AFB to incorporate the
semantic information from the first and last frames into the middle part of the video by inserting
anchor frames. As illustrated in Fig. 2, our method consists of two main components. The adaptive
anchor frame selection module first generates a candidate set of anchor frames and selects the most
suitable one, which is then utilized by the anchor frame guided generation module to produce the
final video. Detailed descriptions of these two modules are presented in the subsequent sections.
3.1
PRELIMINARIES
Diffusion models learn the underlying data distribution x0 ∼q(x0) by learning to reverse a prede-
fined, iterative process of noising data. For I2V diffusion models Blattmann et al. (2023), the process
often operates in the latent space of a pre-trained VAE encoder to reduce computational complexity,
where a clean video sample x0 ∈RN×H×W is first encoded into latent space as z0 = E(x0). A
forward Markov process is then applied to gradually corrupts this latent representation into pure
Gaussian noise over T steps:
q(z1:T | z0) =
T
Y
t=1
q(zt | zt−1),
q(zt | zt−1) = N

zt;
p
1 −βtzt−1, βtI

,
(1)
where βt ∈(0, 1) is a predefined noise schedule at time step t. The reverse process reconstructs a
clean latent from pure noise zT via iterative denoising, which can be formulated as:
zt−1 = update(zt, fθ(zt; t, c); t),
(2)
where fθ is a denoising network, and c is the conditioning signal. In some flow-based model, the
network is specifically parameterized as uθ to predict a velocity field. After the iterative denoising,
the final clean latent is decoded back to the generated video via a VAE decoder.
3.2
ADAPTIVE ANCHOR FRAME SELECTION
To obtain anchor frames with high similarity to the first and last frames, we design the adaptive
anchor frame selection module, which consists of two core stages, as shown in Fig. 2(a). First, a
reverse generation process is employed to create an anchor frame candidate set. Second, we apply
an adaptive anchor frame selection strategy to select the appropriate anchor frame from this set.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Reverse Generation Process.
Given the first frame I0 and last frame IN−1, we swap their po-
sitions and employ Qwen Bai et al. (2023) to generate a reverse-direction prompt denoted as P rev,
which captures the semantic and visual context of both frames and explicitly describes the transition
dynamics between them,
P rev = Qwen(IN−1, I0).
(3)
This text prompt is subsequently encoded into a text embedding, denoted as cP rev. The new initial
frame IN−1 and final frame I0, are encoded to form the conditional input zc:
zc = E(IN−1, I0),
(4)
where E is the VAE encoder.
The conditional input zc, along with text embedding cP rev, guides the model during sampling. The
iterative denoising update can be formulated as
zt−1 = update(zt, uθ(zt; t, zc, cP rev); t),
(5)
where uθ(zt; t, zc, cP rev) denotes the output velocity predicted by the model, and t represents the
timesteps.
We terminate the reverse denoising at a stop step K. Since the latent zt is noise-corrupted at inter-
mediate timesteps, we compute the predicted clean sample ˆz0 derived from the current step zt:
ˆz0 = zt −√1 −¯αtϵθ(zt, t)
√¯αt
(6)
Decoding the predicted ˆz0 at stop step K yields a sequence of predicted clean frames {In}N−1
n=0 ,
which forms the candidate set for anchor selection. Let T be the total denoising steps, we perform
reverse denoising for K ≤T steps. K = T corresponds to the full reverse process, whereas K < T
provides an accelerated variant.
Adaptive Anchor Frame Selection.
To identify a suitable anchor frame from this candidate set
and determine its insertion position, we first define a frame quality evaluation function Q to assess
the generation quality of each frame In in the candidate set. We evaluate the entire sequence to find
the frame with the poorest quality, located at index np:
np = arg min
n
Q(In),
(7)
where n ∈[0, N −1]. This index corresponds to the normalized relative position α = np/(N −1),
which marks the location of the most significant continuity breakpoint.
As discussed in Appendix E, the continuity breakpoint location is nearly symmetric between forward
and reverse generation. To mitigate this information attenuation at the corresponding position in
the forward process, we replace the generated frame at location α with a high-quality anchor frame
selected from the candidate set obtained via reverse generation. Since the reverse generation process
swaps the first and last frames, the index of the anchor frame in the candidate set na should follow
a mirror positional relationship with α:
na = (N −1)(1 −α).
(8)
The frame na is usually close to the first frame (the original last frame) of the reverse generation,
which means it is less affected by information attenuation, and typically exhibits high quality and
strong semantic alignment. These characteristics make it an ideal anchor frame, denoted as Ia.
In this work, we measure frame quality based on LPIPS. Unlike metrics such as PSNR and SSIM,
which perform pixel-level image comparison, LPIPS utilizes a pre-trained deep neural network to
more accurately simulate human visual perception. A higher LPIPS value indicates a greater percep-
tual difference between adjacent frames, corresponding to poorer coherence in the video segment.
Therefore, the peak values of LPIPS mark the transition points with the worst temporal coherence in
the video sequence. Our final frame quality evaluation function Q is defined as the negative of the
local average LPIPS for frame In:
Q(In) = −1
2(LPIPS(In−1, In) + LPIPS(In, In+1)).
(9)
Thus, a large LPIPS value results in a small Q(In) , signifying a low quality for the frame In.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.3
ANCHOR FRAME GUIDED GENERATION
After obtaining the anchor frame, we feed the first frame I0, last frame IN−1 and anchor frame Ia as
conditions into the video generation model as shown in Fig.2(b). To inform the model of the three
frames we already have and prevent their regeneration, we design an indicator that specifies which
frames need generation and which are already available. We leverage the reasoning capability of
Qwen to derive a coherent text prompt P fwd from the given first and last frame images:
P fwd = Qwen(I0, IN−1).
(10)
Subsequently, we extract the image features from the first-last frames and the text features cP fwd from
the generated prompt P fwd. After combining these features, they are fed into the video generation
model along with the indicator to guide the final video generation.
Different I2V models have different sampling methods. In this paper, we use the Wan2.1-I2V to
illustrate the specific implementation of our anchor frame guided generation module. In Wan2.1-
I2V, we use an additional binary mask frame as the indicator. We introduce a binary mask M ∈
{0, 1}1×N×h×w, where 1 indicates the frames to be retained and 0 indicates frames to be generated.
While the spatial dimensions of M match those of zc, its temporal length is the same as the target
video. Then it is rearranged in a shape of s×n×h×w, where s is the temporal span of the encoder.
The first frame I0, last frame IN−1 and anchor frame Ia are concatenated with zero-padded frames
along the time axis to form the guiding frames Ic ∈RC×N×H×W . These guiding frames are then
compressed into the latent space using the encoder zc = E(Ic) and zc ∈Rc×n×h×w, with c = 16
representing the latent channels, n = 3 + (N −3)/41, h = H/8 and w = W/8.
Additionally, we use the image encoder of CLIP Radford et al. (2021) to extract conditioning fea-
tures c0 and cN−1 from the first frame I0 and last frame IN−1. These are then concatenated to get
a conditioning vector ci:
ci = [c0, cN−1].
(11)
These features are then injected into the DiT Li et al. (2022) model through decoupled cross-
attention. The final iterative denoising process is given by
zt−1 = update(zt, uθ(zt; t, m, ci, cP fwd, zc); t),
(12)
where m represents rearranged masks, uθ(zt; t, m, ci, cP fwd, zc) denotes the output velocity pre-
dicted by the model. After a certain denoising process, we obtain a clean latent z0. This latent
representation z0 encapsulates the semantic information from the first and last frames, guided by
the anchor frame and conditional inputs, and is ready for further decoding to produce the final
video.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Baseline Models.
To evaluate the effectiveness and generalizability of our method, we integrate
it into two state-of-the-art I2V frameworks: Wan 2.1 Wang et al. (2025a) and Hunyuan Video Wei-
jie Kong et al. (2024). For comparison, we include two categories of baseline methods: (1) the
current state-of-the-art FLF2V model, Wan2.1-FLF2V Wang et al. (2025a); and (2) video frame
interpolation approaches, including ViBiDSampler Yang et al. (2025a) and Generative Inbetween-
ing Wang et al. (2025b).
Evaluation Metrics.
For evaluation metrics, we use LPIPS Zhang et al. (2018) to evaluate in-
dividual frame quality and FVD Unterthiner et al. (2019) for overall video quality. SSIM Wang
et al. (2004) and PSNR measure similarity between generated and original videos. Additionally,
following StoryEval Wang et al. (2024), we adopt MLLMs, GPT-4o OpenAI (2024) and Gemini 2.0
Flash C Eric Bieber et al. (2025), as additional evaluators to assess the overall video quality from
two perspectives: inter-frame consistency and prompt matching degree, with scores up to 100.
1The constant 3 in this equation represents the total number of control frames after inserting the anchor
frame (i.e., the first frame, the anchor frame, and the last frame). In scenarios utilizing multiple anchor frames
for FLF2V tasks, this equation generalizes to n = (Na + 2) + (N −(Na + 2))/4, where Na is the number of
anchor frames.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 4: Qualitative evaluation. We compare Wan 2.1 and Wan2.1 + AFB across different scenar-
ios. The first row of each group represents the results of Wan 2.1, and the second row represents the
results of our method. The anchor frame inserted is highlighted with the red bounding box.
Table 1: Comparison with baseline models.
Baseline Models
LPIPS ↓FVD ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑GPT-4o ↑
Gemini 2.0
Flash ↑
ViBiDSampler
0.19
426.15
0.90
33.08
82.06
82.88
Generative inbetweening
0.24
453.76
0.85
31.25
75.42
72.15
HunyuanVideo-I2V
0.25
496.32
0.82
31.48
73.28
71.69
HunyuanVideo +AFB (Ours)
0.21
435.71
0.89
32.54
81.33
79.26
Wan2.1-I2V
0.22
449.68
0.87
32.13
79.31
76.43
Wan2.1-FLF2V
0.19
413.68
0.91
33.20
84.23
84.94
Wan2.1 +AFB (Ours)
0.16
375.12
0.97
35.41
88.64
89.35
Figure 3: Distribution of our dataset.
Dataset.
At
present,
there
is
a
notable
absence of high-quality,
publicly available
datasets specifically designed for the FLF2V
task. To evaluate the performance of our AFB
across different scenarios, we collect a dataset
of first and last frames encompassing various
scenes such as TV series, indoor/outdoor scene
and human poses from the DAVIS Pont-Tuset
et al. (2017), the RealEstate10K Salem et al.
(2021) and publicly available videos online.
We filter the collected videos to create a high-
quality dataset featuring significant visual vari-
ation between the first and last frames, resulting
in a final collection of 436 videos and their cor-
responding frame pairs. The distribution of our
dataset is shown in the Fig.3.
4.2
BASELINE COMPARISONS
Qualitative Evaluation.
We present a visual comparison between our method and Wan2.1-I2V in
Fig.4, showing the superior performance of our approach in terms of motion stability, consistency
and overall quality. Under the same input conditions (first-last frames, text prompts), Wan2.1-I2V
shows issues in the middle frames of the generated video, such as scene distortion, chaotic human
limbs and reduced subject consistency. These issues are effectively mitigated with our AFB. More-
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3: Ablation study on stop step K.
Stop Step (K)
Time (min)
Overhead
FVD ↓
LPIPS ↓
SSIM ↑
PSNR ↑
GPT-4o↑
Gemini↑
5
23
+15%
412.73
0.19
0.90
32.74
82.53
81.64
15
27
+35%
388.45
0.18
0.93
33.68
85.32
86.13
40
37
+85%
379.35
0.16
0.96
34.81
87.59
87.30
50
41
+105%
375.12
0.16
0.97
35.41
88.64
89.35
Table 4: Ablation study on text prompts.
Text prompts
Methods
LPIPS ↓
FVD ↓
SSIM ↑
PSNR ↑
General Texts
Wan2.1
0.32
486.23
0.76
29.15
General Texts
Wan2.1 + AFB (Ours)
0.28
475.33
0.81
30.54
Text by Qwen
Wan2.1
0.22
449.68
0.87
32.13
Text by Qwen
Wan2.1 + AFB (Ours)
0.16
375.12
0.97
35.41
over, our approach is not only effective in real-world scenarios but also generalizes well to animated
scenes, as shown in the third row of Fig.4. More comparison results are available in the Appendix. B.
Quantitative Evaluation.
We conduct comparative evaluations using our dataset against baseline
models. The results are shown in Tab.1. It is evident that our AFB method substantially enhances
the overall quality of video generation, along with the smoothness and consistency between the first
and last frames, outperforming all original baseline models.
4.3
ABLATIONS
Table 2: Ablation study on multiple anchor frames.
Na values
Na = 1
Na = 2
Na = 3
LPIPS ↓
0.16
0.18
0.21
FVD ↓
375.12
386.94
397.50
SSIM ↑
0.97
0.93
0.82
PSNR ↑
35.41
34.27
30.49
Effect of Multiple Anchor Frames.
We
ablate the number of anchor frames (Na) to
study how additional constraints affect gen-
eration quality. Specifically, we use the qual-
ity assessment function Q to identify Na
(where Na ∈{1, 2, 3}) frames with the low-
est quality scores in reverse sequence, and
select their mirrored-position counterparts as
anchor frames. As shown in Fig. 2, under our
default video length setting (5 s), using a single anchor frame achieves optimal performance. This
finding is further supported by our user study (see Appendix. H for details). We attribute the degra-
dation with more anchors to over-constraining the generation trajectory: multiple anchors may intro-
duce competing constraints, which can reduce motion fluency and diminish generative diversity. In
this setting, a single anchor frame is sufficient to mitigate semantic decay while preserving genera-
tive diversity, striking an effective balance. For longer videos, however, multi-anchor configurations
can be beneficial; see Appendix G for more details.
Effect of Stop Step K.
As described in Sec. 3.2, we terminate the reverse denoising after K
steps and perform anchor selection based on the resulting candidate sequence. This stop step K
offers a direct efficiency-quality trade-off in AFB2. Intuitively, a smaller K reduces computation
but provides less denoising and weaker visual cues, whereas a larger K yields more reliable candi-
dates at the cost of higher overhead. As shown in Tab 3,reducing the stop step significantly lowers
time overhead. Notably, terminating at timestep 15 (t = 15) achieves an optimal balance between
performance and cost: the FVD is 388.45, which is very close to the full-pass AFB (375.12) and
still significantly outperforms both the original Wan2.1-I2V (449.68) and Wan2.1-FLF2V (413.68),
while the inference time increases by only 35% compared to the baseline (27 min vs. 20 min).
2Except for the ablation in Table 3, all other experiments in the main paper use the full reverse denoising
(K = T) to maximize generation quality. In practice, K can be adjusted to trade off efficiency and fidelity.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 5: Inter-frame similarity analysis. For DAVIS-25 train-69 (Left), the initial frames show
almost no change; however, starting from frame 40, a sudden scene shift (motorcycle movement)
indicates poor continuity in the intermediate frames. For RealEs-25 95 (Right), the scene switches
abruptly to another between frames 40 and 70, demonstrating that the generation of intermediate
frames is not controlled by the first and last frames.
Figure 6: Visualization of the first and last frames’ attention to each intermediate frame. The
left and right figures respectively show the effects before and after the application of our method.
Effect of Text Prompts.
Tab.4 presents an ablation study on text prompts, comparing specific
descriptions generated by Qwen Bai et al. (2023) (customized to align first-last frame semantics)
with a general prompt such as “a nice video”. The results show that our AFB outperforms Wan2.1-
I2V Wang et al. (2025a) in both cases. Moreover, detailed textual guidance enhances the controlla-
bility of video generation, meeting the requirements of user-customized generation.
4.4
EMPIRICAL STUDY
Analysis.
To verify whether our proposed AFB effectively bridges the information from the first
and last frames to the middle frames, we conduct analytical experiments. We randomly select some
samples from our dataset and perform comparative similarity analysis on the video frames generated
under first-last frame conditions versus with our AFB method (using the LPIPS metric, where higher
values indicate lower similarity). As shown in Fig.5, our AFB successfully bridges the semantics
of the first and last frames to the intermediate frames via anchor frames, thus enhancing the overall
consistency of the video. In Fig. 6, we visualize and compare the self-attention of the first and last
frames to the intermediate frames for our AFB method and the original method. Before incorpo-
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
rating the anchor frame, the attention maps for the intermediate frames exhibit significant sparsity.
After applying our method, this phenomenon is markedly mitigated, which demonstrates that our
AFB successfully bridges the semantics of the first and last frames to the intermediate frames via
anchor frames, thus enhancing the overall consistency of the video.
5
CONCLUSION
First-last frame video generation suffers from semantic degradation in intermediate frames, causing
scene distortion and subject deformation that undermine temporal consistency. To address this is-
sue, we propose Anchor Frame Bridging (AFB), a training-free method that mitigates distortion by
inserting an anchor frame to bridge the semantics of the first and last frames. Specifically, to obtain
an appropriate anchor frame, we introduce an adaptive selection module that dynamically selects
the proper anchor frame from candidate sets generated through a reverse process. After that, we
develop an anchor frame guided generation approach to generate final video. Experimental results
verify that our AFB explicitly enhances the propagation of the first-last frame’s semantics, thereby
improving the consistency and overall quality of the generated video.
Discussion.
Our method inherits limitations from the underlying I2V foundation models. While
outperforming baseline models in extreme scenarios involving drastic viewpoint changes, severe
occlusions and non-rigid deformations, our approach still exhibit motion distortion and physically
implausible motion. We analyze these failure cases in the Appendix D.1. Looking forward, we be-
lieve these limitations will be mitigated as more powerful video generation models emerge. More-
over, our analysis of semantic information decay and the proposed anchor-frame insertion strategy
offers valuable insights for future research on temporal continuity in video generation, particularly
for challenging tasks such as long-form generation with distantly spaced start and end frames.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
U24B6012,
61972217, 32071459, 62176249, 62006133, 62271465, 62406167), the Shenzhen Medical Research
Funds in China (No. B2302037), the New Generation Artificial Intelligence-National Science and
Technology Major Project (No. 2025ZD0122702), and AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China.
REFERENCES
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-VL: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, local-
ization, text reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023.
Bytedance. jimengai. Website, 2024. https://jimeng.jianying.com/.
Ice Pasupat Noveen Sachdeva Inderjit Dhillon Marcel Blistein Ori Ram Dan Zhang Evan Rosen
C Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reason-
ing, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.06261.
Duolikun Danier, Fan Zhang, and David Bull. LDMVFI: Video frame interpolation with latent
diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09508, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen Video: High
definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2210.02303.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. CogVideo: Large-scale pre-
training for text-to-video generation via transformers.
In The Eleventh International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
rB6TpjAuSRy.
Mengshun Hu, Kui Jiang, Zhihang Zhong, Zheng Wang, and Yinqiang Zheng. IQ-VFI: Implicit
quadratic motion estimation for video frame interpolation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6410–6419, June 2024.
Zhewei Huang, Tianyuan Zhang, Wen Heng, Boxin Shi, and Shuchang Zhou. Real-time intermediate
flow estimation for video frame interpolation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
Siddhant Jain, Daniel Watson, Eric Tabellion, Aleksander Hoły´nski, Ben Poole, and Janne Kontka-
nen. Video interpolation with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7341–7351, June 2024.
Lingtong Kong, Boyuan Jiang, Donghao Luo, Wenqing Chu, Xiaoming Huang, Ying Tai, Chengjie
Wang, and Jie Yang. IFRNet: Intermediate feature refine network for efficient frame interpola-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 1969–1978, June 2022.
Junlong Li, Yiheng Xu, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Cha Zhang, and Furu Wei. DiT: Self-supervised
pre-training for document image transformer.
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM international
conference on multimedia, pp. 3530–3539, 2022.
Zhen Li, Zuo-Liang Zhu, Ling-Hao Han, Qibin Hou, Chun-Le Guo, and Ming-Ming Cheng. AMT:
All-pairs multi-field transforms for efficient frame interpolation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9801–9810, June 2023.
Zongyi Li, Shujie HU, Shujie LIU, Long Zhou, Jeongsoo Choi, Lingwei Meng, Xun Guo, Jinyu Li,
Hefei Ling, and Furu Wei. ARLON: Boosting diffusion transformers with autoregressive models
for long video generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=8pusxkLEQO.
Koichi Namekata, Sherwin Bahmani, Ziyi Wu, Yash Kant, Igor Gilitschenski, and David B. Lindell.
SG-I2V: Self-guided trajectory control in image-to-video generation. In The Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=uQjySppU9x.
OpenAI. DALL·E 3. Website, 2023. https://openai.com/index/dall-e-3.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Accessed:
2024-11-09.
Junheum Park, Keunsoo Ko, Chul Lee, and Chang-Su Kim. BMBC: Bilateral motion estimation
with bilateral cost volume for video interpolation. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
2020.
Bohao Peng, Jian Wang, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Ming-Chang Yang, and Jiaya Jia. ControlNeXt:
Powerful and efficient control for image and video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06070,
2024.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Federico Perazzi, Sergi Caelles, Pablo Arbel´aez, Alexander Sorkine-Hornung, and
Luc Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. arXiv:1704.00675, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
8748–8763. PmLR, 2021.
Ahmed Salem, Hatem Ibrahem, Bilel Yagoub, and Hyun Soo Kang. Stereo Extrapolation: View
synthesis with multiplane images. In 2021 International Conference on Electronics, Information,
and Communication (ICEIC), pp. 1–3. IEEE, 2021.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Liao Shen, Tianqi Liu, Huiqiang Sun, Xinyi Ye, Baopu Li, Jianming Zhang, and Zhiguo Cao.
Dreammover: Leveraging the prior of diffusion models for image interpolation with large mo-
tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 336–353. Springer, 2024.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman.
Make-A-
Video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. In The Eleventh International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
nJfylDvgzlq.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Rapha¨el Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
and Sylvain Gelly. FVD: A new metric for video generation. 2019.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Vari-
able length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
vOEXS39nOF.
Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. MCVD - masked conditional video
diffusion for prediction, generation, and interpolation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hX5Ia-ION8Y.
Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao,
Jianxiao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, et al.
Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314, 2025a.
Xiaojuan Wang, Boyang Zhou, Brian Curless, Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, Aleksander Holynski,
and Steven M. Seitz. Generative Inbetweening: Adapting image-to-video models for keyframe
interpolation, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15239.
Yiping Wang, Xuehai He, Kuan Wang, Luyao Ma, Jianwei Yang, Shuohang Wang, Simon Shaolei
Du, and Yelong Shen. Is your world simulator a good story presenter? a consecutive events-based
benchmark for future long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16211, 2024.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–
612, 2004.
Zijian Zhang Rox Min Zuozhuo Dai Jin Zhou Jiangfeng Xiong Xin Li Bo Wu Jianwei Zhang Kath-
rina Wu Weijie Kong, Qi Tian et al. HunyuanVideo: A systematic framework for large video
generative models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03603.
Serin Yang, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. ViBiDSampler: Enhancing video interpolation
using bidirectional diffusion sampler. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nNYA7tcJSE.
Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang,
Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, Da Yin, Yuxuan.Zhang, Weihan Wang, Yean Cheng,
Bin Xu, Xiaotao Gu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. CogVideoX: Text-to-video diffusion models
with an expert transformer. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2025b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=LQzN6TRFg9.
Yan Zeng, Guoqiang Wei, Jiani Zheng, Jiaxin Zou, Yang Wei, Yuchen Zhang, and Hang Li. Make
pixels dance: High-dynamic video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8850–8860, 2024.
Guozhen Zhang, Yuhan Zhu, Yutao Cui, Xiaotong Zhao, Kai Ma, and Limin Wang. Motion-aware
generative frame interpolation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.03699.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Shiwei Zhang, Jiayu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Kang Zhao, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiwu Qin, Xiang Wang,
Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. I2VGen-XL: High-quality image-to-video synthesis via cascaded
diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04145, 2023.
Yabo Zhang, Yuxiang Wei, Dongsheng Jiang, XIAOPENG ZHANG, Wangmeng Zuo, and Qi Tian.
ControlVideo: Training-free controllable text-to-video generation. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=5a79AqFr0c.
Tianyi Zhu, Dongwei Ren, Qilong Wang, Xiaohe Wu, and Wangmeng Zuo. Generative inbetween-
ing through frame-wise conditions-driven video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 27968–27978, June 2025.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
THE USE OF LLMS
In the preparation of this manuscript, we leveraged Large Language Models (LLMs) to refine the
text for improved clarity. Furthermore, we use LLM to generate image descriptions which served
as one of the control condition for video generation process, as detailed in Sec. 3, and to provide
auxiliary evaluation metric for our experimental results as detailed in Sec. 4.1.
B
MORE VISUALIZATION RESULTS
The current FLF2V (First-Last Frame to Video) model exhibits several limitations when generating
videos from given start and end frames, as shown in Fig. 7. These issues include unnatural and abrupt
transitions—particularly toward the end of the sequence—where the video appears to forcibly align
with the provided last frame. Additionally, the model produces implausible limb distortions of the
main character, which become especially noticeable during high-intensity motions. Other artifacts,
such as ghosting, further degrade the visual quality and coherence of the generated videos.
(b)  A third hand appears out of nowhere
(a)  Mutation near the last frame
(c)  Extremely twisted limbs
(e)  Ghosting
(f)  Twisted limbs and ghosting
(d) Suddenly disappearing text
(g)  Unnatural motion trajectory
(h)  Strange left arm
Figure 7: Disadvantages of generating videos.
The detailed experimental results are presented in Fig. 8. Each unit displays the provided first
and last frames along with the corresponding text prompts on the left. On the right, the top and
bottom rows show the video sequences generated without and with our method, respectively. A
comparison between the two rows clearly demonstrates that our AFB module substantially enhances
the alignment with the given start and end frames. For instance, in the third example, distorted
body movements present in the original output are effectively corrected after introducing the anchor
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 8: More Visualization Results. In each unit, the top row shows the results generated by
original FLF2V model, and the bottom row shows the videos generated after applying our AFB
method. The added anchor frame are highlighted with a red box.
frame, leading to more natural and coherent motion. Similarly, in the seventh case, the original video
exhibits an unnatural phenomenon where water flows from the faucet and stops abruptly without
external interaction—an artifact that is successfully resolved with our approach.
C
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ANCHOR FRAME INSERTION STRATEGIES
In the Anchor Frame Guided Generation step, we conducted a qualitative ablation study comparing
two anchor frame insertion strategies. For Wan 2.1 Wang et al. (2025a), the first approach averages
the latent representation of the anchor frame, zf
c , with the noise latent, zf
t , at each denoising step,
where f indicates the anchor frame position. In contrast, the second approach follows the original
Wan 2.1 setup, applying no additional averaging operation. The comparison results are presented
in Fig. 9. The observations indicate that the second approach outperforms the first, as the first
method leads to severe grayish blurring in the intermediate frames and fails to produce plausible
video sequences. Therefore, the second approach is adopted as the final method.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
“The camera reveals the dining 
area while keeping the staircase 
and living room in view.”
“ The couple walks along the 
sandy path toward the ocean.”
Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of anchor frame insertion strategies. In each unit, the top row
illustrates the anchor-frame averaging approach, and the bottom row shows the direct conditioning
approach without averaging. The added anchor frames are highlighted with a red box.
Figure 10: Complex scenarios. Existing I2V models struggle with complex scenarios, such as those
featuring non-rigid motion, extreme viewpoint changes, or severe occlusions. Although our method
yields observable improvements, it does not fully resolve inherent issues like joint distortion and
motion blur, which remain challenging.
D
MORE DISCUSSION
D.1
CHALLENGING TASKS
Our method is limited by the capabilities of the baseline I2V model. For challenging tasks invovling
non-rigid motion, severe occlusions and Drastic viewpoint shifts, It is difficult for existing I2V mod-
els to accurately predict object trajectories and human body movements. As illustrated in the Fig. 10,
while the insertion of our anchor frame yields some improvement over the baseline model, the mo-
tion sequence remains unnatural when compared to the ground truth. Artifacts such as physically
implausible distortions and ghosting effects are still present. However, we believe that with the on-
going advancements in foundation models, combined with our method, these challenging issues will
be gradually resolved in the near future.
D.2
RESEARCH ON PHYSICAL CAUSALITY
Our AFB method also demonstrates effectiveness in scenarios with strong physical causality (e.g.,
an orange falling into water, glass shattering, water droplet ripples, smoke dissipation, etc.). This is
because the efficacy of AFB does not rely on a perfectly coherent reversed video—the reverse gener-
ation process merely serves as a means to obtain high-quality anchor frames that are highly relevant
to the first and last frames. As long as we can obtain an anchor frame that conforms to physical laws
and maintains strong relevance to the first and last frames, AFB can function effectively, and this
can be achieved through the reverse process.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
“Smoke rises, dissipates, 
leaving a faint trace.”
“A glass goblet falls 
and shatters, spraying 
shards and liquid.”
“A droplet falls into 
water, creating ripples.”
“An orange falls into a 
cup, splashing droplets 
around.”
Figure 11: Application examples of our method in scenarios with strong physical causality.
Row 1: Video generated by reversing the first and last frames, where red boxes indicate the anchor
frames selected during the reversal process; Row 2: Results using our method (AFB) with forward
generation between the first and last frames, where red boxes represent inserted anchor frames.
Experimental results indicate that video generation based solely on first and last frames often pro-
duces poor results near the last frame, leading to continuity breaks. Therefore, after mirroring the
sequence, we select frames from the early segment of the reversed video as anchor frames. As shown
in Figure 11, although the full reversed video exhibits physical distortions in its later part, the initial
segment remains highly faithful. This suggests that even in extreme scenarios, the early stage of
reverse generation still serves as a highly reliable semantic source, enabling AFB to extract anchor
frames from this interval and guide coherent forward video generation.
D.3
ANALYSIS OF ASYMMETRIC MOTION
“A sports car 
accelerates and then 
coasts on a wide road.”
Figure 12: Cases of Asymmetric Motion. Row 1 depicts the results generated using only the first
and last frames; Row 2 shows the output from reversing the first and last frames, with the selected
anchor frame highlighted by a red box; Row 3 presents the generation after inserting the anchor
frame, where the inserted anchor frame is marked with a red box.
To investigate the impact of asymmetric motion on our method, we test the “car accelerating and then
coasting” example. As illustrated in Figure 12, the decay of semantic constraints manifests similarly
in both forward and reverse generations, regardless of whether the car is fast or slow. Specifically,
both directions exhibit motion discontinuities, such as the car failing to initiate acceleration naturally.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In contrast, after applying AFB, the anchor frame effectively bridges this semantic gap, rendering
the acceleration process significantly smoother and physically coherent.
D.4
ANALYSIS OF COMPLEXITY DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FIRST AND LAST FRAMES
“A man practices parkour 
by kicking off a wall, 
grabbing a bar, 
and swinging to leap.”
“A peach blossom sways 
as a girl captures 
the moment..”
“A woman walks through a stone 
corridor and moves to 
a lawn before a 
Gothic building.”
Figure 13: Analysis of Complexity Difference Between First and Last Frames. The red box
indicates the inserted anchor frame.
We conduct evaluations on three specific scenarios representing different challenges (Figure 13).
Our findings are as follows: Complex Motion (e.g., Parkour): Despite the highly dynamic nature of
the motion, our method successfully identifies a valid anchor frame, generating coherent high-speed
actions. High Complexity Variance with Continuity (e.g., Character Scene Transition): In cases
where the starting and ending backgrounds differ significantly but the subject remains consistent
(e.g., the same character walking from a corridor to the outdoors), AFB still functions effectively.
The semantic continuity of the subject allows the anchor frame to bridge the complexity gap. High
Complexity Variance without Continuity (e.g., Flower →Girl): In extreme cases where the first
and last frames are semantically unrelated, .the generated result resembles a disjointed, slideshow-
like transition rather than a coherent video. However, we wish to clarify that the primary objective
of AFB is to preserve physical and semantic continuity; therefore, semantically unrelated boundary
frames fall outside the scope of our current method. While AFB is not designed to resolve this
semantic disjointedness, addressing such non-continuous constraints remains an interesting direction
for future work.
E
VALIDATION OF CONTINUITY BREAKPOINTS BETWEEN FORWARD AND
REVERSE GENERATION
To validate the robustness of the hypothesis that continuity breakpoints occur at consistent posi-
tions in both forward and reverse generation, we conduct large-scale quantitative experiments on
a complete dataset encompassing diverse motion types (e.g., asymmetric motion, severe deforma-
tion). We computed frame-wise average LPIPS curves for all 436 videos during forward generation
(I0 →IN−1) and reverse generation (IN−1 →I0). Statistical result (Figure 14) reveals that: the
quality collapse point (LPIPS peak) in forward generation occurs at frame 56, while in reverse gen-
eration it appears at frame 55, with merely a 1-frame absolute positional deviation.
This provides strong statistical evidence that, regardless of video content, generation direction, or
motion complexity, quality collapse points tend to occur at statistically consistent relative positions.
This symmetry is not coincidental but fundamentally driven by “information decay”—a systematic
issue dominated by model architecture and error accumulation, largely independent of generation
direction.
Specifically, most FLF2V models are adapted from I2V architectures. Their inherent characteristic
is that the semantic constraints from the first and last frames gradually weaken over temporal pro-
gression (as shown in Figure 1 (a)). During forward generation, as frames move farther from the first
frame, diminishing semantic constraints allow minor visual artifacts to remain uncorrected. These
subtle deviations propagate, accumulate, and amplify frame-by-frame (Error Accumulation), even-
tually causing the generated content to diverge from plausible trajectories and triggering continuity
breaks at specific ”semantic vacuum zones” (as shown in Fig. analysis).
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 14: Average LPIPS between adjacent frames in forward and reverse generation. Blue
circles indicate positions where LPIPS exhibits extremum values, representing continuity breaks.
Although reverse generation alters the direction, the mechanisms of “constraint decay” and “er-
ror accumulation” persist, leading to continuity breaks at positions similar to those in the forward
process. AFB strategically leverages reverse generation to locate the most severe breakpoints and
inserts high-quality anchor frames at corresponding positions in the forward process, thereby miti-
gating information decay at these critical locations.
F
ADDITIONAL BASELINE COMPARISON
FCVG
MoG
Wan 2.1 + AFB
Figure 15: Qualitative evaluation. Red box highlights the defective portions in generated videos.
Table 5: Quantitative evaluation. The best results are bolded.
Baseline Models
LPIPS ↓
FVD ↓
SSIM ↑
PSNR ↑
FCVG
0.19
438.83
0.86
33.62
MoG
0.26
421.53
0.69
18.41
Wan2.1 +AFB (Ours)
0.16
375.12
0.97
35.41
In Tab. 1, we compare against recent baselines under our default setting of generating 5-second
videos. As FCVG Zhu et al. (2025) and MoG Zhang et al. (2025) are typically evaluated on shorter
clips (approximately 1–2 seconds), we include their comparisons here in the supplementary mate-
rial. Qualitative results are shown in Figure 15, and quantitative results are presented in Table 5.
FCVG and MoG typically generate short clips (approx. 1-2 seconds). In contrast, AFB generates
longer, complex videos (approx. 5 seconds). As shown in Table 5, AFB significantly outperforms
both FCVG and MoG. Specifically, AFB achieves the lowest FVD (375.12) and the highest PSNR
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(35.41), demonstrating superior temporal coherence and visual fidelity. As detailed in Figure 15,
Both FCVG and MoG exhibit noticeable ghosting artifacts on static objects, such as the cabinet
handles (highlighted in red boxes). In contrast, AFB leverages semantic anchors to generate clean,
artifact-free frames with better logical coherence.
G
ANALYSIS OF LONG VIDEOS WITH MULTIPLE ANCHOR FRAMES
“A girl and a boy meet and talk on the rooftop. He gives her bird feed, and as she offers it, a pigeon lands on her hands to eat.”
Figure 16: Long videos with multiple anchor frames. Row 1 shows the generation using only the
first and last frames. Row 2 presents the result with one anchor frame inserted. Row 3 displays the
output with two anchor frames added. Row 4 illustrates the generation with three anchor frames
incorporated. All inserted anchor frames are highlighted by red boxes.
For further analysis, we employ Jimeng AI to generate 10-second long videos. The results (Fig-
ure 16) demonstrate that for long-video generation, a multi-anchor strategy (inserting 2 or 3 frames)
yields superior performance compared to the single-anchor approach. As the number of anchors in-
creases, the temporal coherence of the intermediate frames also improves. For future work on longer
videos and more complex scenarios, we plan to extend AFB by exploring adaptive multi-anchor in-
sertion methods.
H
USER STUDY
We design a questionnaire and distribute it to different participants. In the questionnaire, we compare
the results of Wan 2.1 and Wan 2.1 + AFB in three aspects: video consistency, text alignment and
generated video quality. We also evaluated how the number of anchor frames, K, affects generation
quality, assessing our method across K ∈{1, 2, 3}. Further details of the questionnaire are presented
below. A total of 52 valid responses are collected and analyzed, with the statistical results shown
in Fig.17. It can be observed that our method is more favored by users compared to using Wan 2.1
alone. Additionally, among the different numbers of anchor frames tested, users clearly prefer the
configuration with a single anchor frame (K = 1).
Our Google Form survey consists of 4 sections, with a total of 33 questions. In the first three sections,
we compare our AFB with Wan2.1 Wang et al. (2025a). In the final section, we compare videos
generated with different frame insertion positions in AFB. Specific information and screenshots of
the questionnaire are as follows:
1. Consistency in video generation. Users are asked to evaluate the temporal consistency of
the generated videos with the given first and last frames. For instance, when provided with
two images of a girl raising her hands alongside a text description, users are instructed to
select the video demonstrating higher consistency. See Fig. 18 for details.
2. Text Alignment in Video Generation. Users assess whether the video content accurately
reflect the provided text descriptions. For instance, given a text prompt describing a smooth
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 17: User Study. The left figure shows user evaluations of Wan 2.1 Wang et al. (2025a) and
Wan 2.1 + AFB in terms of video consistency, text alignment and generated video quality. The right
figure shows user evaluations on how number of anchor frames impacts video generation quality.
camera transition from a kitchen to a bathroom along with first and last frames, users are
instructed to select the video that best matched the text prompt. See Fig. 19.
3. Visual Quality of Video Generation. Users select the video that exhibit the highest overall
visual quality. For example, given a prompt such as ”A woman gracefully maintains a yoga
pose on a rocky surface by the ocean.” along with first and last frames, users choose the
video displaying superior visual fidelity, such as realistic water ripples or detailed rock
textures. See Fig. 20.
4. Impact of Multiple Anchor Frames. Users compare videos generated using K anchor
frames (K ∈1, 2, 3) alongside the original Wan 2.1 FLF2V output. They are instructed to
vote for the video with the best overall quality in each case. The interface for this task is
shown in Fig. 21.
In the user study, participants evaluate nine groups of videos in the first three sections and six in the
final section. For each group, they select the video they consider to be of the highest quality. Each
selection counts as one point. We collect a total of 52 valid responses, and the aggregated results are
visualized in Fig. 17.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 18: The instruction and example for user study.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 19: The instruction and example for user study.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 20: The instruction and example for user study.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 21: The instruction and example for user study.
25