--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
BRIDGING SUCCESSOR MEASURE AND ONLINE POLICY
LEARNING WITH FLOW MATCHING-BASED REPRESEN-
TATIONS
Haosen Shi1,
Jianda Chen2,
Sinno Jialin Pan1
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2Ant International
{haosen.shi.ai@link, sinnopan@}.cuhk.edu.hk jianda.chen@ant-intl.com
ABSTRACT
The Successor Measure (SM), a powerful method in reinforcement learning (RL),
describes discounted future state distributions under a policy, and it has recently
been studied using generative modeling techniques. Although SM is a powerful
predictive object, it lacks compact representations tailored for online RL. To ad-
dress this, we introduce Successor Flow Features (SF2), a representation learning
framework that bridges SM estimation with policy optimization. SF2 leverages
flow-matching generative models to approximate successor measures, while en-
forcing a structured linear decomposition into a time-invariant embedding and a
time-dependent projection. This yields compact, policy-aware state-action features
that integrate readily into standard off-policy algorithms like TD3 and SAC. Experi-
ments on DeepMind Control Suite tasks show that SF2 improves sample efficiency
and training stability compared to strong successor feature baselines. We attribute
these gains to the compact representation induced by flow matching, which reduces
compounding errors in long-horizon predictions. The code is available on 1.
1
INTRODUCTION
A key reason for the success of deep reinforcement learning (RL) in complex, sequential real-
world tasks is its ability to learn meaningful representations automatically. This is often achieved
through neural network architectures with specific inductive bias and efficient representation training
algorithms. Effective representations generalize well across different observations and environments,
give accurate value estimation, make efficient planning over long decision sequences, and achieve
robustness when encountering new observed states (Kulkarni et al., 2016). However, how to find a
general and efficient representation learning method that does not rely entirely on reward functions
but focuses on environment dynamics is a crucial problem, especially for complex tasks with a
continuous state space, sparse reward, and long decision sequences.
Successor Representation (SR) (Dayan, 1993) offers a promising approach by decoupling the reward
function from environment dynamics. It captures the expected future state occupancy under a given
policy, offering a dual interpretation: it can be viewed as a linear basis for state-action value functions,
or equivalently, as a compact representation of infinite-horizon discounted visitation distributions.
However, SR is inherently limited to discrete state spaces. To overcome this limitation, Successor
Feature (SF) (Barreto et al., 2017) was introduced, incorporating a reward-relevant feature mapping
along with a Temporal Difference (TD)-style learning algorithm. A key challenge, however, remains
the design of an appropriate feature mapping, which is still an open problem (Ollivier, 2025).
More recently, Successor Measure (SM) emerged as a generalization of SR that directly models
the discounted future state occupancy. Unlike SF, which relies on predefined features, SM describes
distributions in principle in infinite-dimensional space and is typically estimated via generative
models. Recent advances such as the geometric horizon model (GHM) (Thakoor et al., 2022), the
γ-model (Janner et al., 2020), and TDFlow (Farebrother et al., 2025) utilize generative modeling and
generalized TD learning to estimate SM, facilitating applications in policy evaluation and transfer
1https://github.com/Shiien/successor-flow-representation-implementation
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
learning. In particular, TDFlow builds on recent progress in generative modeling, specifically flow
matching techniques (Lipman et al., 2023), enabling direct, simulation-free trajectory generation
between distributions. This makes it highly efficient for continuous and high-dimensional settings.
Furthermore, the mixed nature of flow matching aligns naturally with TD-style training.
The stability and efficiency of flow matching make it exceptionally well-suited for modeling SM, as it
mitigates compounding errors over long horizons and enhances scalability in complex environments.
However, online RL imposes stricter demands, requiring representations that not only retain the
predictive power of SM but also adapt quickly to newly observed experiences. These requirements
motivate a new framework that unifies the robust long-term forecasting of SM, the stable and
efficient generative learning of flow matching, and the rapid adaptability essential for effective
online RL. In this paper, we introduce Successor Flow Features (SF2), a new framework that
leverages flow matching to approximate SM. SF2 enforces a structured decomposition into a time-
invariant low-dimensional embedding of state-action pairs and a time-dependent projection
operator. This design offers several key advantages: (i) the time-invariant embedding is tailored
for online RL, enabling joint training with value functions and seamless integration into existing
algorithms like TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018); (ii) the time-dependent
projection enables generative models to reconstruct SM while decoupling policy-dependent and
environmental structure. We evaluate SF2 by integrating it into TD3 and SAC on continuous-control
benchmarks from Mujoco Playground (Zakka et al., 2025). Our results demonstrate improved average
performance over standard baselines. While preliminary, these findings indicate that combining
flow-based generative modeling with successor representations is a highly promising direction for
scalable RL representation learning. Our contributions are threefold:
• We propose a generative model with a linear projection structure to approximate SM via
flow matching.
• We introduce SF2, an informative representation for online RL that is trained jointly with
value functions.
• We provide empirical evaluation on challenging continuous-control tasks, together with
diagnostic studies of bootstrapped flow matching.
To the best of our knowledge, SF2 is the first approach to explicitly integrate successor measures
with policy optimization for online RL representation learning. We emphasize that SF2 is an initial
step in this direction rather than a complete solution: rigorous theoretical guarantees and broader
empirical validation remain important open challenges.
2
PRELIMINARY
In this paper, we use uppercase serif fonts to denote a set S, P(S) to denote the space of probability
measures over a measurable set S, uppercase capital letters to denote random variables (e.g., S) and
Rn to denote the n-dimensional real space.
Markov Decision Process
We consider a discounted Markov decision process M = (S, A, P, r, γ),
which includes the state space S, discrete or continuous action space A, transition kernel P :
S × A →P(S), reward function r : S × A →R, and discount factor γ ∈[0, 1). Following
the setting of Blier et al. (2021), the state space is measurable (either continuous or discrete). In
an MDP, an agent interacts with the environment by observing the current state st ∈S, selecting
an action at ∈A according to policy π, and then receiving a reward r(st, at) while transitioning
to a new state st+1 ∼P(·|st, at). The objective of reinforcement learning algorithms is to find
a policy π : S →P(A) that maximizes the expected cumulative reward, or the value function
V π(s) = Eπ [P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at) | s0 = s] for any state s ∈S, where Eπ denotes expectation under
the distribution induced by policy π interacting with the MDP. The value function satisfies the
Bellman equation: V π(s) = P
a∈A π(a|s)

r(s, a) + γ P
s′∈S P(s′|s, a)V π(s′)

.
Flow Matching
Flow Matching (FM) (Lipman et al., 2023) is a technique used in generative
modeling to learn mappings between distributions. Define a time-dependent diffeomorphic map ϕk =
ϕ(·, k) : Rn × [0, 1] →Rn governed by an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) : dxk
dk = v(xk, k)
with time k ∈[0, 1], where xk := ϕk(x0). We use the notation k rather than t for the ODE’s time
parameter to distinguish it from the timestep t used in MDPs. A Continuous Normalizing Flow, one
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
kind of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Chen et al., 2018), is employed to parameterize the
vector field vk = v(·, k) : Rn × [0, 1] →Rn as uθ(·, k) and determines the flow dynamics.
To find the training target of the parameterized time-dependent vector field, FM introduces a mix-
ture representation approach to estimate the marginal vector field as a mixture of conditional vec-
tor fields that condition on each data point from ptarget. For example, given a prior distribution
p0(x) = N(0, In) and a sampled data point x1 from the target distribution p1(x) := ptarget(x),
FM constructs conditional probability paths pk(x|x1) = N(x; µk(x1), σ2
k(x1)In). The correspond-
ing conditional time-dependent diffeomorphic map and the conditional vector field are given by
ϕk(x, x1) = σk(x1)x + µk(x1) and dϕk(x,x1)
dk
, respectively. The training objective is
L(θ) = Eϵ∼N(0,I),x1∼ptarget(x),k∼U(0,1)
"uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x1), k) −dϕk(ϵ, x1)
dk

2#
,
where U(0, 1) represents the uniform distribution over the interval [0, 1]. This objective minimizes
the squared difference between the parameterized vector field and the target vector field at randomly
sampled time points, states, and noise values. The time parameter k is uniformly sampled to ensure
the model learns the entire trajectory from the prior distribution to the target distribution.
Samples are generated by solving x1 = x0 +
R 1
0 uθ(xk, k)dk where x0 ∼p0 with standard ODE
solvers (Gautschi, 2011). When additional conditions are imposed as c for the vector fields uθ(x, k, c)
and the sampled data conforms to the distribution x ∼q(·|c), the FM framework is also capable of
constructing flexible conditional generative models.
Successor Measure
The SM (Blier et al., 2021) is a probability distribution over states that captures
the expected discounted future state visitations under a given policy, a transition kernel, and a state-
action pair. Formally, for a policy π, the SM µπ(X|s, a) represents the probability of visiting state
s′ ∈X ⊆S when starting from state-action pair (s, a) and following policy π, with geometric
discounting:
µπ(X|s, a) = (1 −γ)E(s1,s2,...,st,...)∼P π
"X
t
γt1st∈X | s0 = s, a0 = a
#
,
where the expectation is taken over all possible trajectories generated by starting at state s, taking
action a, and then following policy π for all subsequent steps. The indicator function 1st∈X equals 1
when the state at time t belongs to the set X and 0 otherwise.
Similar to the Bellman equation for the value function, the SM satisfies the Bellman equation (Blier
et al., 2021):
µπ(X|s, a) = (1 −γ)P(X|s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
P(s′|s, a)
X
a′∈A
π(a′|s′)µπ(X|s′, a′).
(1)
This recursive formulation reveals that the SM can be interpreted as a mixture distribution between the
immediate state distribution induced by the transition kernel (with weight 1 −γ) and the bootstrapped
future state distribution (with weight γ). The conditional generative models can be employed to
predict the SM utilizing the recursive form equation 1. In general, the learning objective is formulated
as a maximum likelihood estimation problem, which aims to find the optimal generative model by
solving:
max
µ
EX∼(1−γ)P (·|s,a)+γEs′∼P π(·|s,a),a′∼π(·|s′)[µπ(·|s′,a′)][log µπ(X|s, a)].
(2)
While this objective provides a general framework, the specific loss function needs to be adapted
according to the choice of generative model. For instance, in the Geometric Horizon Model
(GHM) (Thakoor et al., 2022) (also referred to as the γ-model (Janner et al., 2020)), different
implementations employ distinct training losses, such as those based on VAE (Kingma & Welling,
2013) or GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In this work, we focus on the best-performing variant, the
flow matching used in TDFlow (Farebrother et al., 2025), which utilizes a modified flow matching
loss. We will elaborate on its details in the next section. A further discussion about the benefits of
using flow matching for SM through an explicit mixture viewpoint can be found in Appendix A.2.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3
SUCCESSOR FLOW FEATURE
3.1
FLOW MATCHING FOR SUCCESSOR MEASURE LEARNING
The SM’s mixture structure is particularly well-suited for flow matching approaches, allowing us
to directly model the interpolation between immediate transitions and future state distributions. For
learning µπ(s′|s, a) with its corresponding parameterized time-dependent vector field uθ(x, k, s, a),
we utilize its natural mixture representation:
µπ(s′|s, a) = (1 −γ)P(s′|s, a) + γEs′′∼P (·|s,a),a′′∼π(·|s′′)µπ(s′|s′′, a′′),
which yields the corresponding FM training objective for the parameterized vector field uθ(x, k, s, a)
on given tuple (s, a, s′):
Lflow(θ) =(1 −γ)LP (θ) + γLbootstrapping(θ)
=(1 −γ)Eϵ,k,s′∼P (·|s,a)
"uθ(ϕk(ϵ, s′), k, s, a) −dϕk(ϵ, s′)
dk

2#
+ γEϵ,k,a′∼π(·|s′),se∼µθ(·|s′,a′)
"uθ(ϕk(ϵ, se), k, s, a) −dϕk(ϵ, se)
dk

2#
,
(3)
where LP (θ) is used to learn the transition distribution and Lbootstrapping(θ) uses a temporal difference
form where bootstrapping distributions induced by uθ(·, ·, s′, a′) serve as µπ(·|s′, a′). However, this
sampling procedure introduces substantial computational costs due to the need for multiple network
evaluations during the generation process.
To enhance training efficiency, we leverage the fact that sampling from the SM can be achieved
through an ODE solver(Euler method as an example): se ∼µθ(·|s, a) is equivalent to se =
Euler(ϵ, uθ(·, ·, s, a)) where ϵ ∼N(0, In). Motivated by the TD2-CFM loss formulation from (Fare-
brother et al., 2025), we directly align the vector fields conditioned on different state-action pairs
at the same noise level instead of generating full successor states and then comparing them. This
approximation avoids expensive ODE integration while preserving the consistency between local
flow directions. Intuitively, if two vector fields agree on their evolution, their generated distributions
will also agree.
Lbootstrapping(θ) ≈E
ϵ,k,a′∼π(·|s′)
xk=ODE(ϵ,k,uθ(·,·,s′,a′))
h
∥uθ(xk, k, s, a) −uθ(xk, k, s′, a′)∥2i
.
(4)
This approach aligns the vector fields conditioned on different state-action pairs at the same noise
level, eliminating the need to fully generate denoised states and then apply the ϕk transformation.
This form substantially reduces the need for small integration steps in the ODE solver, decreasing
computational overhead while maintaining performance. We provide a detailed analysis of the
trade-off between computational efficiency and model performance in our ablation studies presented
in Section 4.3. It is noted that the final loss used for learning is based on expectation over transition
tuples from the current policy π. We model conditional vector fields on the latent space induced
by the flow parameterization (Section 2). This avoids explicit density ratios on S and ensures that
training targets remain well-defined even when the SM is provided implicitly via pushforwards.
3.2
SUCCESSOR FLOW FEATURE FROM ESTIMATED SUCCESSOR MEASURE
Following the estimation of the SM, we employ a linear projection formulation to derive a compact
feature representation.
Definition 3.1 (Successor Flow Feature) We define the Successor Flow Feature (SF2) on state-
action pair (s, a) as the output of the mapping ψ : RdimS × RdimA →Rd, which generates the
time-dependent conditional vector field u(s′, k, s, a) as a linear projection with a time-conditioned
matrix field ζ : RdimS × [0, 1] →Rd×dimS:
u(s′, k, s, a) = ζ(s′, k)⊤ψ(s, a),
where ψ(s, a) is time-invariant and captures the sufficient dimension reduction property.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In contrast to conventional conditional generative models that combine conditions, timestamps, and
noised inputs through complex non-linear transformations, our approach employs a time-invariant
feature ψ(s, a) that interacts only at the final stage with the matrix field ζ. This architectural choice
promotes the encoding of temporal structures within ζ that are essential for effective downstream
representation learning. This linear projection approach has been explored in prior work (Shribak
et al., 2024), which extracts spectral features from environmental transition dynamics to enhance
reinforcement learning performance.
The representation function ψ(s, a) achieves the Sufficient Dimension Reduction (SDR) (Fukumizu
et al., 2009) by establishing conditional independence se ⊥⊥(s, a) | ψ(s, a), i.e. µπ(se|s, a) =
µπ(se|ψ(s, a)), thereby ensuring that the extracted representations comprehensively capture all
relevant information about how state-action pairs relate to successor states. Additionally, this
formulation exhibits universal approximation properties (Sasaki & Hyv¨arinen, 2018), enabling it
to theoretically approximate any target function to arbitrary accuracy, which makes it particularly
effective for modeling SM across diverse policies and environments.
(s, a)
ψ(s, a) ∈Rd
(s′, k)
ζ(s′, k) ∈Rd×dim(S)
uθ(s′, k, s, a) = ζ(s′, k)⊤ψ(s, a)
ODE: dxk
dk = uθ(xk, k, s, a)
Samples from successor measure µπ(·|s, a)
ψ
ζ
Figure 1: Schematic visualization of how ψ, ζ, and u interact. ψ(s, a) encodes the time-invariant flow
representation of the current state–action pair. ζk(s′) provides a time-varying projection over future
states s′. Their inner product defines the vector field u(s′, k, s, a), which describes how future-state
probability mass evolves in the flow-matching objective.
3.3
CONNECTION TO SUCCESSOR REPRESENTATION AND DIFFUSION SPECTRAL
REPRESENTATION
Connection to Successor Representation
Let’s consider the one-step gradient updating on the
parameterized ψ neural network with parameters θ using equation 3 with equation 4 under a transition
tuple (s, a, s′) and sampled k ∼U(0, 1), ϵ ∼N(0, In). When k →0, let ϕk(ϵ, x) = kx + (1 −
k)ϵ, dϕk(ϵ,x)
dk
= x −ϵ, we have:
Lflow(θ)=(1−γ)
ζ(ks′+(1−k)ϵ, k)⊤ψ(s, a)−(s′−ϵ)
2+γ
ζ(xk, k)⊤ψ(s, a)−ζ(xk, k)⊤ψ(s′, a′)
2.
As k approaches 0, we can make the approximation:
ζ(ks′ + (1 −k)ϵ, k) ≈ζ(ϵ, 0), and ζ(xk, k) ≈ζ(ϵ, 0).
The intermediate point xk is approximately obtained through a single ODE transformation step:
xk ≈ϵ + kζ(ϵ, 0)⊤ψ(s′, a′).
Substituting these approximations into the loss function yields the semi-gradient, where we stop the
gradient backpropagation on the bootstrapped target. We have
∇θL ≈2

(1 −γ)
 ζ(ϵ, 0)⊤ψ(s, a) −(s′ −ϵ)

+ γ
 ζ(ϵ, 0)⊤ψ(s, a) −ζ(ϵ, 0)⊤ψ(s′, a′)

∇θψ(s, a),
which can be rewritten more concisely as:
∇θL ≈2

ψ(s, a)⊤ζ(ϵ, 0) −
 (1 −γ)(s′ −ϵ) + γψ(s′, a′)⊤ζ(ϵ, 0)

∇θψ(s, a).
This formulation reveals a temporal difference learning structure where the target combines: (1) A
direct supervision component (1 −γ)(s′ −ϵ) representing immediate information. (2) A discounted
bootstrapped component γψ(s′, a′)⊤ζ(ϵ, 0) that propagates future representations.
Rearranging into a Bellman-like equation, we have
ψ(s, a) ←(1 −γ)(ζ(ϵ, 0)T )+(s′ −ϵ) + γψ(s′, a′),
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where (·)+ denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse.
This formulation reveals that our ap-
proach learns a Successor Representation with Dayan’s definition (Dayan, 1993). In our case,
(1 −γ)(ζ(ϵ, 0)T )+(s′ −ϵ) serves as the basic feature that captures immediate transitions, while the
recursive structure ψ(s, a) = (1 −γ)(immediate feature) + γψ(s′, a′) serves as the bootstrapped
part. The process incorporates a novel element where the next state s′ −ϵ undergoes Gaussian
noise perturbation before being projected onto the column space defined by (ζ(ϵ, 0)T )+. This can
be interpreted as learning a basis for the state space that is robust to perturbations, enabling more
effective representation of the expected future state occupancy distribution. This yields an SR-like
recursion on ψ under fixed ζ. We emphasize this is an approximation to motivate design; we do
not claim exact equivalence to SR. The exploration of how the representation behaves and what
properties it captures when k takes values significantly away from 0 remains an open question for
future investigation.
Connection to Diffusion Spectral Representation (Shribak et al., 2024)
As γ approaches zero,
our approach bears resemblance to Diffusion Spectral Representation (Shribak et al., 2024), which
employs diffusion models (Song et al., 2021) rather than flow matching and targets transition probabil-
ities instead of SM. The incorporation of future state transitions enables features to encode transition
dynamics across extended time horizons. In Section 4, we conduct empirical comparisons between
SF2 and its variant with γ = 0 to demonstrate that SF2 achieves better area-under-curve(AUC)
performance compared to approaches that focus solely on short-term transition prediction.
3.4
PRACTICAL POLICY OPTIMIZATION WITH FLOW SUCCESSOR REPRESENTATION
In this paper, we consider combining the proposed representation learning method with standard
online reinforcement learning algorithms on continuous action spaces. We choose SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) and TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) as base algorithms. The learned representation is
only used for building the state-action value function Q(ψθ(s, a)). And the policy will be implicitly
influenced through the ∇aQ(ψθ(s, a)).
To enhance learning stability and performance, we implement two complementary techniques:
Value Alignment:
We augment the flow-matching objective with a value prediction
component:Ltotal = Lflow + λLvalue, where λ controls the relative weight of value prediction. The
value loss follows the standard temporal difference formulation:
Lvalue = E(s,a,r,s′)∼D

Q(ψθ(s, a)) −(r + γ max
a′ Q(ψθ(s′, a′)))
2
.
This approach is compatible with various RL algorithms and can incorporate techniques such as
double Q-learning (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) for improved target estimation.
Algorithm 1 Training SF2 within Off-Policy RL
1: Input:
(state, action, next state, next action) tuple
(s, a, s′, a′), networks (ψ, ζ, ψ′, ζ′), and target for value
learning y′, which depends on the base algorithm
2: Sample ϵ ∼N(0, I), k ∼U(0, 1)
3: sk = k · s′ + ϵ · (1 −k), starget = s′ −ϵ
4: Compute features and next state loss:
5: Lflow = ∥ψ(s, a)T ζ(sk, k) −starget∥2
2
6: Generate state x using numerical integration, start with
x = ϵ:
7: kstart, kend = 0, k
8: kmid = 1
2(kstart + kend)
9: dx = ψ′(s′, a′)T ζ′(x+ 1
2ψ′(s′, a′)T ζ′(x, kstart), kmid)
10: x = x + (kend −kstart)dx
11: Compute generation loss:
12: Lbootstrapping = ∥ψ(s, a)T ζ(x, k)−ψ′(s′, a′)T ζ′(x, k)∥2
2
13: Lvalue = (Q(ψ(s, a)) −y′)2
14: Return Ltotal = (1 −γ)LP + γLbootstrapping + λLvalue
Generative Model Smoothing: We
employ exponential moving average
(EMA) target networks that update pa-
rameters according to θψ′ = (1 −
τ)θψ′ + τθψ and θζ′ = (1 −τ)θζ′ +
τθζ during bootstrapping phases, con-
sistent with established flow match-
ing training practices (Lipman et al.,
2023). We perform an ablation analy-
sis of the effectiveness of this moving
average coefficient in Section 4.3. Fur-
thermore, the EMA-updated parame-
ters θ′
ψ also work in the target network
for the estimation of the value func-
tion, providing an additional layer of
stability to learning dynamics. The
overall training objective Ltotal for
learning SF2, when embedded in off-
policy RL, is shown in Algorithm 1.
For the TD3-based methods, y′ =
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
r + γ min(Q′
1, Q′
2), where Q′
1 and Q′
2 are the target Q-networks evaluated at the next state s′ and
next action a′ sampled from the target policy. For the SAC-based method, y′ = r +γ min(Q′
1, Q′
2)−
α log π(a′|s′), where α is the temperature parameter that determines the trade-off between maximiz-
ing expected reward and entropy, and is updated according to the original SAC paper (Haarnoja et al.,
2018).
4
EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We implemented all experiments using JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and Deepmind Haiku (Hennigan
et al., 2020) to leverage hardware acceleration. For the DeepMind Control Suite (Tunyasuvunakool
et al., 2020), we utilized a GPU-accelerated version, the MuJoCo Playground (Zakka et al., 2025).
All algorithms were edited from their respective implementations in the Brax library (Freeman et al.,
2021). Each experiment is conducted on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. Detailed
architectural specifications, hyperparameter configurations, and environment-specific parameters are
provided in Appendix G.
Flow sampling uses Euler integration with 2 function evaluations (NFEs) unless otherwise noted;
we sample k ∼U(0, 1) and base noise ϵ ∼N(0, I), and condition vector fields on (s, a) and (s′, a′)
as specified in Section 3. We report wall-clock time for representative settings (Section 4.3) and
keep baseline parameter counts comparable by reusing encoder widths and depths across methods
(Appendix G).
4.2
EXPERIMENTS ON CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACES WITH OFF-POLICY LEARNING
We evaluate SF2 on seven diverse tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite (Tunyasuvunakool
et al., 2020), selected to represent a range of challenges in dynamics complexity, reward struc-
ture, and control difficulty. We integrate our approach with two commonly used off-policy algorithms:
SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018). For comparison with the SF method,
we also include Chua et al. (2024), a strong SF method designed for the online RL setting. Their work
reports substantial improvements over prior SF approaches. To provide a fair and rigorous compari-
son, we implemented four baseline methods: TD3Sim/SACSim, which closely follows the approach
described in the Chua et al. (2024) with the TD3/SAC algorithm, and TD3SimLap/SACSimLap ,
which removes the Q-function alignment constraint and incorporates an orthogonality objective for
feature learning via the graph Laplacian. All methods use identical neural network architectures, the
same number of environment steps, and the same number of parallel environments as our proposed
approach.
Following the suggestions described in Patterson et al. (2024), we summarize learning dynamics
and aggregate performance across seven environments using 15 random seeds for each algorithm
variant. For each algorithm variant, we extract evaluation reward curves (mean of episodic returns
over evaluation steps using 1000 trajectories) and compute the Area-Under-Curve (AUC). Then the
AUC is normalized per environment by linearly scaling to [0, 1] using that environment’s minimum
and maximum in order to compare across different environments. For each algorithm family (SAC or
TD3), the aggregate panels report the median, interquartile mean (IQM; the mean between the 25th
and 75th percentiles), mean, and optimality gap (one minus the mean), with 95th percentile confidence
intervals computed using 5000 samples over normalized scores. The results in Figure 2 reveal that
incorporating SF2 enhances the performance of TD3 and SAC across most environments over their
standard versions, with greater improvements when using the full successor version (γ = 0.99).
Our method consistently outperforms both baseline algorithms and the transition version (γ = 0.0),
demonstrating the importance of incorporating a longer temporal horizon in representation learning.
Full per-environment learning curves for both TD3 and SAC variants are deferred to Appendix C.1
(Figure 7).
Interestingly, the performance gains (compared with baseline) are more pronounced for TD3 than
for SAC, suggesting that our method may be particularly beneficial for algorithms that struggle with
exploration or representation learning, and a deterministic policy may improve the training efficiency
for the online successor measure learning. Additionally, the reduced standard deviations in many
cases indicate that SF2 not only improves performance but also enhances stability. Approaches based
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3
TD3-SPR
TD3 Sim
TD3 Sim-Lap
Median
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
IQM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Mean
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Optimality Gap
TD3-family Aggregate Performance (7 envs, normalized AUC)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
SAC-SF2 = 0.99
SAC-Sim-Lap
SAC
SAC-Sim
SAC-SPR
SAC-SF2 = 0.0
Median
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
IQM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Mean
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Optimality Gap
SAC-family Aggregate Performance (7 envs, normalized AUC)
Figure 2: IQM performance across DeepMind Control tasks. Panels summarize the aggregate
AUC for TD3 (upper) and SAC (lower) variants, comparing vanilla baselines, SF-based baselines,
and our SF2 with transition (γ = 0.0) and successor (γ = 0.99) horizons.
on SF tend to struggle on sparse reward tasks based on TD3 experiments, as the majority of transitions
yield a reward of 0.0, making it difficult to effectively learn the task weight w. In contrast, our method
does not depend on this mechanism and thus avoids the associated performance degradation observed
in such sparse-reward settings.
4.3
HYPERPARAMETER ANALYSIS
We examine the influence of three key hyperparameters in our method on the AcrobotSwingup task:
exponential moving average (EMA) coefficient, number of denoising steps, and feature size. We use
the mean episode return over the final 50k steps to verify.
0.005
0.010
0.050
0.100
0.500
1.000
EMA Rate
0
100
200
300
400
500
Return
Effect of EMA Rate on AcrobotSwingup
SAC with SF2
TD3 with SF2
(a) Analysis of exponential
moving average coefficient
τ on performance.
1
2
3
4
Denoising Steps
320
340
360
380
400
420
440
460
Return
Effect of Denoising Steps on AcrobotSwingup
SAC with SF2
TD3 with SF2
(b) Performance evaluation
with varying numbers of
denoising steps.
1
2
3
4
Denoising Steps
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
Run Time (seconds)
Run Time vs Denoising Steps on AcrobotSwingup
SAC with SF2
TD3 with SF2
(c) Training time evalua-
tion with varying numbers
of denoising steps.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Feature Size
300
350
400
450
Return
Effect of Feature Size on AcrobotSwingup
SAC with SF2
TD3 with SF2
(d) Influence of feature size
on ψ networks.
Figure 3: Systematic analysis of hyperparameter effects on SF2 performance. (a) Exponential moving
average coefficient τ demonstrating stability-performance trade-offs, (b) performance sensitivity
to denoising step count in the sampling procedure, (c) computational cost scaling with respect to
denoising steps, and (d) feature size effects on algorithm performance.
EMA Parameter.
Figure 3a demonstrates that the EMA coefficient τ inversely correlates with
performance. Peak results occur at τ = 0.1 for TD3 and τ = 0.01 for SAC, with performance
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
declining as τ approaches 1.0. Despite considerable variance across configurations, these findings
suggest that more stable target network updates (smaller τ values) enhance learning dynamics in our
framework. The results highlight the critical importance of proper τ calibration, as large values can
substantially impair policy effectiveness.
Denoising Steps.
Our analysis reveals that varying the number of denoising steps produces compa-
rable performance outcomes (Figure 3b), though computational costs increase proportionally with
more steps (Figure 3c). We observe that even with minimal denoising steps (1-2), both algorithms
maintain robust performance, suggesting that aligning the bootstrapping part can rely on a rough
sampling process without requiring extensive iterative refinement. The computational efficiency
analysis in Figure 3c further confirms that a small number of denoising steps provides an optimal
balance between performance and computational overhead, as the default choice in experiments.
Feature Size.
As shown in Figure 3d, the two algorithms respond differently to feature size changes.
SAC with SF2 demonstrates similar final 50k steps returns across various feature sizes with low
variance, suggesting effective representation learning even in reduced dimensions. TD3 tends to
benefit from larger feature sizes, though variance increases, while SAC remains stable across sizes.
This indicates that the deterministic policy gradient method particularly benefits from richer feature
representations.
4.4
COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY
The additional time overhead of our method is due to the additional representation learning and
the additional neural network. Here we use the comparison between TD3 and TD3 with SF2 as an
illustration. Each standard TD3 update step consists of one step of critic updating and one step of
actor updating, which is consistent with TD3 with SF2. The main distinction is that an additional
feature representation update step: for each update step, TD3 with SF2 performs seven forward
passes and one backward pass through the ζ network, and two forward passes and one backward pass
through the ψ network. Under identical experimental conditions, the original TD3 method’s running
time on AcrobotSwingup is 659 seconds, while, as reported in Figure 3c, SF2 with 1 denoising step
takes approximately 1300 seconds, about twice as long. Our experiments demonstrate significant
improvements in downstream performance, justifying this trade-off. We will further optimize training
costs in future work.
5
RELATED WORK
Representation learning in RL.
Reconstruction-based methods have been employed for feature
extraction from observations (Hafner et al., 2019; Yarats et al., 2021). Contrastive learning techniques
have emerged as a powerful paradigm for learning discriminative state representations (Laskin et al.,
2020; Stooke et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2023). bisimulation metrics offer a more formal approach
to learning state abstractions by grouping behaviorally equivalent states (Zhang et al., 2021; Castro
et al., 2021; 2023). World models learn to capture the environment’s dynamics, allowing agents to
plan or learn in a learned latent space (Gelada et al., 2019; Seo et al., 2022; Hafner et al., 2025).
Spectral decomposition methods decompose state and actions into low-rank spectral features (Wang
et al., 2021b; Yang & Wang, 2020; Shribak et al., 2024). SF2 uniquely bridges successor measures
and online RL: (1) Unlike world models (Gelada et al., 2019; Seo et al., 2022; Hafner et al., 2025)
and spectral methods (e.g., (Shribak et al., 2024)) that ignore policy-dependent horizons, SF2
explicitly encodes discounted future distributions via flow-matched successor measures; (2) While
reconstruction methods focus on regenerating the observation, our method considers policy and
environment dynamics; (3) Bisimulation methods (Zhang et al., 2021; Castro et al., 2021; 2023)
emphasize state similarity with reward, but SF2 also optimizes features ψ(s, a) from environmental
dynamics not only from the value alignment.
Successor Measure.
SM predicts future state distributions under a given policy, effectively cap-
turing the expected discounted future state occupancy. This concept is closely related to Successor
Representations (Dayan, 1993) and Successor Features (Barreto et al., 2017), decoupling environ-
ment dynamics from reward structures, facilitating efficient policy evaluation and transfer. Blier
et al. (2021) offers a formal mathematical definition of SM and introduces how to estimate it for
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
value function evaluation. Wiltzer et al. (2024) further enhances these approaches by modeling
the full distribution of future state occupancies, providing richer representations for downstream
decision-making. GHMs and γ-models extend the notion of modeling discounted state visitation
distributions, creating a continuum between model-free and model-based RL (Thakoor et al., 2022;
Janner et al., 2020). Agarwal et al. (2025); Touati & Ollivier (2021) also employ SM to build a
representation in the zero-shot RL setting under a precollected offline dataset, always need an extra
exploration policy to collect, which allows for optimal policy inference under other given reward
functions. SF2 fundamentally advances this paradigm by introducing the subsequent flow characteris-
tics ψ(s, a) (Definition 3.1) as a structured linear decomposition of the flow field, enabling principled
representation learning that greatly expands the scope of application beyond previous methods.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed the Successor Flow Feature (SF2) framework, which leverages flow
matching and linear-spectral decomposition to address the challenges of estimating and integrating
successor measures in online RL. By explicitly modeling the mixture structure of successor measures,
our method provides useful state-action representations that facilitate efficient online policy learning
and planning. Through extensive empirical evaluations across discrete and continuous control tasks,
we demonstrated that using SF2 consistently improves performance over standard baselines. Our
results underscore the promise of flow-based generative modeling for successor features, paving the
way for future research on scalable, expressive, and efficient RL representations.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We facilitate reproducibility by providing an anonymized source-code repository in the supplementary
materials. For every experiment, we specify the random seed used, and we document all imple-
mentation and training details in Appendix G and D. Together, these references are sufficient for
independent researchers to replicate our reported results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research work described in this paper was conducted in the JC STEM Lab of Machine Learning
and Symbolic Reasoning funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. And we would also
like to thank the reviewers for their thorough reading of our manuscript and for their constructive
suggestions, which have undoubtedly improved the final version.
REFERENCES
Siddhant Agarwal, Harshit Sikchi, Peter Stone, and Amy Zhang. Proto successor measure: Represent-
ing the behavior space of an agent in a dynamical system. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=s9SVlWOcLt.
Andr´e Barreto, Will Dabney, R´emi Munos, Jonathan J. Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, and
David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike
von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017), pp. 4055–4065.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
L´eonard Blier, Corentin Tallec, and Yann Ollivier. Learning successor states and goal-dependent
values: A mathematical viewpoint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07123, 2021.
Michał Bortkiewicz, Władek Pałucki, Vivek Myers, Tadeusz Dziarmaga, Tomasz Arczewski, Łukasz
Kuci´nski, and Benjamin Eysenbach. Accelerating Goal-Conditioned RL Algorithms and Research.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2408.11052.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Qiao Zhang.
JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
URL
http://github.com/jax-ml/jax.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Tyler Kastner, Prakash Panangaden, and Mark Rowland. MICo: Improved rep-
resentations via sampling-based state similarity for markov decision processes. In A. Beygelzimer,
Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wFp6kmQELgu.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Tyler Kastner, Prakash Panangaden, and Mark Rowland. A kernel perspective on
behavioural metrics for markov decision processes. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nHfPXl1ly7.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Raymond Chua, Arna Ghosh, Christos Kaplanis, Blake A Richards, and Doina Precup. Learning
successor features the simple way. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
49957–50030, 2024.
Peter Dayan. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representation.
Neural computation, 5(4):613–624, 1993.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Contrastive learning
as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:35603–35620, 2022.
Jesse Farebrother, Matteo Pirotta, Andrea Tirinzoni, Remi Munos, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ahmed
Touati. Temporal difference flows. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=j6H7c3aQyb.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http:
//github.com/google/brax.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Kenji Fukumizu, Francis R Bach, and Michael I Jordan. Kernel dimension reduction in regression.
The Annals of Statistics, pp. 1871–1905, 2009.
Walter Gautschi. Numerical analysis. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G. Bellemare. DeepMDP:
Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri
and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2170–2179. PMLR,
09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/gelada19a.html.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 27, 2014.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algorithms
and applications. CoRR, abs/1812.05905, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.
05905.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 09–15 Jun
2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hafner19a.html.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse control tasks
through world models. Nature, 640:647–653, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-08744-2. URL
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-08744-2.
Tom Hennigan, Trevor Cai, Tamara Norman, Lena Martens, and Igor Babuschkin. Haiku: Sonnet for
JAX, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind/dm-haiku.
Michael Janner, Igor Mordatch, and Sergey Levine. γ-models: Generative temporal difference
learning for infinite-horizon prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Sotetsu Koyamada, Shinri Okano, Soichiro Nishimori, Yu Murata, Keigo Habara, Haruka Kita, and
Shin Ishii. Pgx: Hardware-accelerated parallel game simulators for reinforcement learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 45716–45743, 2023.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Ardavan Saeedi, Simanta Gautam, and Samuel J Gershman. Deep successor
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02396, 2016.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. CURL: Contrastive unsupervised repre-
sentations for reinforcement learning.
In Hal Daum´e III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceed-
ings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5639–5650. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v119/laskin20a.html.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow
matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t.
Yann Ollivier. Which features are best for successor features? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10790,
2025.
Andrew Patterson, Samuel Neumann, Martha White, and Adam White. Empirical design in reinforce-
ment learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(318):1–63, 2024.
Stefano Peluchetti. Non-denoising forward-time diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14589, 2023.
Hiroaki Sasaki and Aapo Hyv¨arinen. Neural-kernelized conditional density estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01754, 2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1707.06347.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bach-
man. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=uCQfPZwRaUu.
Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu, Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter
Abbeel. Masked world models for visual control. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bf6on28H0Jv.
Dmitry Shribak, Chen-Xiao Gao, Yitong Li, Chenjun Xiao, and Bo Dai. Diffusion spectral repre-
sentation for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
110028–110056, 2024.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=PxTIG12RRHS.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
from reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9870–9879.
PMLR, 2021.
Shantanu Thakoor, Mark Rowland, Diana Borsa, Will Dabney, R´emi Munos, and Andr´e Barreto.
Generalised policy improvement with geometric policy composition. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 21272–21307. PMLR, 2022.
Ahmed Touati and Yann Ollivier. Learning one representation to optimize all rewards. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:13–23, 2021.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2665963820300099.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Leonid Nisonovich Vaserstein. Markov processes over denumerable products of spaces, describing
large systems of automata. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 5(3):64–72, 1969.
Gefei Wang, Yuling Jiao, Qian Xu, Yang Wang, and Can Yang. Deep generative learning via
schr¨odinger bridge. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 10794–10804. PMLR,
2021a.
Tianhao Wang, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu.
Provably efficient reinforcement learn-
ing with linear function approximation under adaptivity constraints.
In M. Ranzato,
A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 13524–13536. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2021b.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
file/70a32110fff0f26d301e58ebbca9cb9f-Paper.pdf.
Harley Wiltzer, Jesse Farebrother, Arthur Gretton, Yunhao Tang, Andr´e Barreto, Will Dabney, Marc G
Bellemare, and Mark Rowland. A distributional analogue to the successor representation. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 52994–53016. PMLR,
2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wiltzer24a.html.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels, and
regret bound. In Hal Daum´e III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
10746–10756. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
yang20h.html.
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improving
sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning from images. In Proceedings of the aaai
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10674–10681, 2021.
Kevin Zakka, Baruch Tabanpour, Qiayuan Liao, Mustafa Haiderbhai, Samuel Holt, Jing Yuan Luo,
Arthur Allshire, Erik Frey, Koushil Sreenath, Lueder A. Kahrs, Carlo Sferrazza, Yuval Tassa,
and Pieter Abbeel. Mujoco playground: An open-source framework for gpu-accelerated robot
learning and sim-to-real transfer., 2025. URL https://github.com/google-deepmind/
mujoco_playground.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=-2FCwDKRREu.
Ruijie Zheng, Xiyao Wang, Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Jieyu Zhao, Huazhe Xu, Hal Daum´e III,
and Furong Huang. $\texttt{TACO}$: Temporal latent action-driven contrastive loss for visual
reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ezCsMOy1w9.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
A.1
CHALLENGES OF MIXED DISTRIBUTION IN GHMS
The learning procedure for GHMs using generative models, particularly those without explicit density
estimation, follows a principled sampling-based strategy maximizing the objective in equation 2.
Transition tuples {s, a, s′} are sampled from given environment interactions or a pre-collected dataset.
For each tuple, an indicator variable is sampled from a Bernoulli distribution with parameter γ to
determine which distribution to be learned by GHMs: 1) with probability 1 −γ, learn from the true
observed successor state s′; and 2) with probability γ, learn from bootstrapped samples, where a state
is sampled from the generative model, µ(·|s′, a′), conditioned on the observed next state and a next
action sampled according to the current policy. This procedure implements the recursive structure of
the normalized successor measure (NSM) by sampling.
While theoretically sound, mixture-based learning struggles when γ is close to 1 2: the data distribu-
tion is dominated by the bootstrapped samples from the generative model, introducing significant bias
and inaccuracy—especially early in training—with minimal anchoring to real data. In the following
section, we demonstrate this challenge via a Gaussian mixture example, where learning the mixed
distribution grows increasingly difficult as γ approaches unity.
4
2
0
2
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Density
Target Distribution
4
2
0
2
4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
VAE Samples
4
2
0
2
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
GAN Samples
4
2
0
2
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
FM Samples
4
2
0
2
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
FM Samples(Explicit Mixture)
Figure 4: Visualization shows flow-matching methods better capture the multimodal structure of
Gaussian mixtures compared to other generative models, such as GANs and VAEs, which is crucial
for SM learning with explicit mixture targets.
A.2
EMPIRICAL VALIDATION ON MIXTURE DISTRIBUTIONS (GAUSSIAN AS AN EXAMPLE)
We evaluate several generative models on a one-dimensional Gaussian mixture that is a simplified yet
insightful setting. The target distribution is shown in the left-most part of Figure 4. We train VAEs,
GANs, and FM models, and observe that learning becomes difficult as the mixing parameter γ ≈1.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Training Steps
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
Wasserstein Distance
Sample Quality over Training (Lower is Better)
VAE
GAN
FlowMatching
FlowMatching(Explicit Mixture)
Figure 5: Wasserstein distance between true distribution and generated samples.
Under γ = 0.99, Figure 4 provides visualizations of the final generated samples, and Figure 5
reports the Wasserstein distance (Vaserstein, 1969) between generated samples and the ground truth
2To obtain a longer horizon length and align with the discount factor used in the value function definition, the
discount factor γ is expected to be very close to 1, e.g. γ = 0.99.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
distribution over the training process. These results show how accurately each generative model
captures the underlying mixture distribution. Specifically, visualization results show that VAEs and
GANs struggle to capture the multimodal structure, while FM exhibits a stronger ability to model the
target distribution.
In the next section, we will introduce how to explicitly leverage the mixture structure and correspond-
ing mixture weights to further enhance the FM approach for more efficient and accurate learning of
complex multimodal distributions.
A.3
EXPLICIT MIXTURE OBJECTIVE FOR FLOW MATCHING
To enhance learning of mixture distributions p(mix)(x) = γp(1)(x) + (1 −γ)p(2)(x), we introduce an
explicit mixture objective within the flow matching framework. Unlike black-box density estimation,
our method directly encodes the known compositional structure of the target distribution into the
training objective. This improves computational efficiency and accelerates optimization convergence.
Let uθ(x, k) denote the parameterized time-dependent vector field, the marginal distribution on
time k = 0 is a standard Gaussian distribution, and ϕk(ϵ, x) is the conditional time-dependent
diffeomorphic map. Let x ∼p(mix), k ∼U(0, 1), ϵ ∼N(0, In) and vk(ϵ, x) = dϕk(ϵ,x)
dk
, the original
flow matching objective for mixture distributions is,
L = Ek,x,ϵ∥uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x), k) −vk(ϵ, x)∥2=Eϵ
Z 1
0
Z
p(mix)(x)∥uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x), k) −vk(ϵ, x)∥2dxdk

.
Since pmix is a mixture, we can decompose this into:
L=Eϵ
Z 1
0
Z 
γp(1)(x) + (1 −γ)p(2)(x)

∥uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x), k) −vk(ϵ, x)∥2 dxdk

=γ E ϵ,k
x(1)∼p(1)
uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x(1)), k)−vk(ϵ, x(1))

2
|
{z
}
L1
+(1−γ) E ϵ,k
x(2)∼p(2)
uθ(ϕk(ϵ, x(2)), k)−vk(ϵ, x(2))

2
|
{z
}
L2
=γL1 + (1 −γ)L2.
This explicit decomposition enables training by sampling from each mixture component and reweight-
ing the loss according to its corresponding mixture weight. By leveraging the known structure of the
mixture, this approach aligns closely with the recursive formulation of the NSM, which also exhibits
a mixture form rooted in the Bellman equation, which is also noted in (Farebrother et al., 2025). As
shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5, our proposed method, FlowMatching (Explicit Mixture), outperforms
standard baselines by effectively capturing the multimodal structure of the target distribution. It is
worth noting that not only can flow matching methods exploit this form of distribution mixing, but
also diffusion models (Song et al., 2021) and bridge-based models (Wang et al., 2021a), which all
rely on the diffusion mixture representation (Peluchetti, 2023).
B
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND COMPARISONS
B.1
COMPARISON WITH OTHER REPRESENTATION LEARNING METHODS
To align with our method, we configure SPR (Schwarzer et al., 2021) with K =1, so it relies only
on the immediate successor transition, just like our approach. Since the SPR method was originally
designed for image input, while our environment uses state input, we use Gaussian noise to simulate
data augmentation. In order to select a suitable augmentation setting, we perform a hyperparameter
sweep over the Gaussian noise magnitude on the AcrobotSwingup environment.
Following the sensitivity analysis in Figure 6, we adopt the best-performing noise standard deviation
of 0.05 and reuse it across all 7 DeepMind Control Suite environments without further tuning. This
configuration is used to generate the aggregate IQM statistics in Figure 2 and the full learning curves
in Figure 7. Ensuring that improvements stem from representational benefits rather than environment-
specific hyperparameter adjustments. In this configuration, our proposed method exhibits better
performance.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20
40
60
80
100
Evaluation index / training steps
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Episode reward
AcrobotSwingup
Training dynamics sensitivity to noise_level
noise=0.001
noise=0.01
noise=0.05
noise=0.1
Figure 6: SPR augmentation sweep. Performance of SPR on AcrobotSwingup for different Gaussian
noise magnitudes used in the augmentation pipeline. The noise level of 0.05 is selected for the cross-
environment experiments.
C
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
C.1
MAIN RESULTS ON DEFAULT SETTINGS
Figure 7 presents the full learning curves for 7 DeepMind Control Suite tasks using TD3 and SAC
variants, complementing the aggregate IQM statistics shown in the main text.
C.2
ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS
To rule out the possibility that our gains come only from a specific chosen training budget, we
reran every experiment with a 1M-timestep budget and 15 random seeds. Figure 8 reports the IQM
aggregates for TD3 and SAC under this stricter setting, showing that SF2 still surpasses vanilla
and SF-based baselines by a clear margin. Figure 9 then provides the per-environment learning
dynamics, confirming that our method maintains its advantage even when learning is constrained
to only 1M timesteps. We also study the effect of gradient steps and generalization to observation
noise. Figure 10 (left) shows that allocating more gradient steps to the feature updater steadily
improves the IQM score, highlighting that SF2 benefits from thorough feature optimization. For
the noise experiment, we train on the 1M-timestep AcrobotSwingup environment using six random
seeds, store the checkpoints, and evaluate on perturbed observations with Gaussian noise injected
into the observation space. Figure 10 (right) reports the AUC under different noise levels; because
SF2 achieves higher performance even before perturbation, it also sustains better AUC after noise
injection.
C.3
EXTENSION TO DISCRETE ACTION SPACES WITH IMAGE INPUT
We conducted additional experiments on the MinAtar benchmark from PGX (Koyamada et al., 2023)
using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). Because our method constructs representations over state-action
pairs (s, a), we replaced the standard PPO state-value estimator V with an action-value estimator
Q(s, a) and trained it with TD-λ target (λ = 0.95). We also adopted separate actor and critic
networks for baseline and our methods. MinAtar provides image-like observations and a discrete
action space; to make our approach applicable in this setting, we evaluated two implementations: (i)
linear interpolation along image channels (shown as SF2 w/o AE), and (ii) an autoencoder-based
pipeline in which the generative model is trained in the latent space (shown as SF2 w AE). All
experiments were run with discount factor γ = 0.9. Results are presented in Figure 11, where we
report both IQM (interquartile mean) statistics and training curves. These results provide preliminary
evidence that our method can operate effectively in image-based environments with discrete actions.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
AcrobotSwingup
CartpoleBalanceSparse
CartpoleSwingupSparse
CheetahRun
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
FishSwim
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
HopperHop
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
PendulumSwingup
TD3
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
TD3 Sim
TD3 Sim-Lap
TD3-SPR
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
AcrobotSwingup
CartpoleBalanceSparse
CartpoleSwingupSparse
CheetahRun
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
FishSwim
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
HopperHop
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
PendulumSwingup
SAC
SAC-Sim
SAC-Sim-Lap
SAC-SPR
SAC-SF2 = 0.0
SAC-SF2 = 0.99
Figure 7: Learning curves across tasks. Each plot reports training curve with 95th percentile
confidence intervals (bootstrap using 5000 samples) for TD3 (upper) and SAC (lower) with vanilla
baselines, SF-based baselines, SPR (Schwarzer et al., 2021), and our SF2 with transition (γ = 0.0)
and successor (γ = 0.99) horizons.
D
DETAILED ALGORITHMS
We demonstrate the detailed algorithm training process of SF2 when combined with TD3 and SAC,
respectively.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3
TD3 Sim-Lap
TD3 Sim
Median
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
IQM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Mean
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Optimality Gap
TD3-family Aggregate Performance (7 envs, normalized AUC)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
SAC-SF2 = 0.99
SAC
SAC-Sim-Lap
SAC-Sim
SAC-SF2 = 0.0
Median
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
IQM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Mean
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Optimality Gap
SAC-family Aggregate Performance (7 envs, normalized AUC)
Figure 8: IQM performance at 1M timesteps. Aggregate AUC statistics for TD3 (upper) and SAC
(lower) at a 1M-step training budget using 15 seeds.
Algorithm 2 TD3 with SF2
1: Initialize θ, ϕ, ψ, ζ; target networks θ′ ←θ, ϕ′ ←ϕ, ψ′ ←ψ, ζ′ ←ζ; replay buffer B
2: for episode = 1 to M do
3:
Initialize environment, get initial state s0
4:
for step = 1 to T do
5:
at = πθ(st) + ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, σ); execute at, observe rt, st+1; store (st, at, rt, st+1) in B
6:
if B is large enough then
7:
for G gradient steps do
8:
Sample batch (s, a, r, s′) from B
9:
y = r + γ mini=1,2 Qϕ′
i(ψ′(s′, πθ′(s′)))
10:
ϕi ←ϕi −αQ∇ϕi(Qϕi(ψ(s, a)) −y)2
11:
ψ ←ψ −αψ∇ψ(Qϕi(ψ(s, a)) −y)2
12:
(ψ, ζ) ←(ψ, ζ) −αSR∇ψ,ζLSR
13:
if step mod d = 0 then
14:
θ ←θ −απ∇θQϕ1(ψ(s, πθ(s)))
15:
θ′ ←τθ + (1 −τ)θ′
16:
ϕ′ ←τϕ + (1 −τ)ϕ′
17:
ψ′ ←τψ + (1 −τ)ψ′
18:
ζ′ ←τζζ + (1 −τζ)ζ′
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
end if
22:
end for
23: end for
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
AcrobotSwingup
CartpoleBalanceSparse
CartpoleSwingupSparse
CheetahRun
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
FishSwim
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
HopperHop
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
PendulumSwingup
TD3
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
TD3 Sim
TD3 Sim-Lap
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
AcrobotSwingup
CartpoleBalanceSparse
CartpoleSwingupSparse
CheetahRun
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Reward
FishSwim
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
HopperHop
0
20
40
60
80
100
Training steps
PendulumSwingup
SAC
SAC-Sim
SAC-Sim-Lap
SAC-SF2 = 0.0
SAC-SF2 = 0.99
Figure 9: Learning curves at 1M timesteps. Each plot shows the median and 95% CIs (bootstrap,
5000 samples) over 15 seeds for TD3 (upper) and SAC (lower) with vanilla baselines, SF-based
baselines, SPR (Schwarzer et al., 2021), and our SF2 with transition (γ = 0.0) and successor
(γ = 0.99) horizons.
Algorithm 3 SAC with SF2
1: Initialize θ, ϕ, ψ; target networks θ′ ←θ, ϕ′ ←ϕ, ψ′ ←ψ; replay buffer B
2: for episode = 1 to M do
3:
Initialize environment, get initial state s0
4:
for step = 1 to T do
5:
at = πθ(st) + ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, σ); execute at, observe rt, st+1; store (st, at, rt, st+1) in B
6:
if B is large enough then
7:
for G gradient steps do
8:
Sample batch (s, a, r, s′) from B
9:
y = r + γ mini=1,2 Qϕ′
i(ψ′(s′, πθ′(s′)))
10:
ϕi ←ϕi −αQ∇ϕi(Qϕi(ψ(s, a)) −y)2
11:
ψ ←ψ −αψ∇ψ(Qϕi(ψ(s, a)) −y)2
12:
(ψ, ζ) ←(ψ, ζ) −αSR∇ψ,ζLSR
13:
if step mod d = 0 then
14:
θ ←θ −απ∇θQϕ1(ψ(s, πθ(s)))
15:
θ′ ←τθ + (1 −τ)θ′
16:
ϕ′ ←τϕ + (1 −τ)ϕ′
17:
ψ′ ←τψ + (1 −τ)ψ′
18:
ζ′ ←τζζ + (1 −τζ)ζ′
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
end if
22:
end for
23: end for
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1
2
4
8
16
Gradient Steps
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
IQM Score (with 95% CI)
IQM Distribution by Gradient Steps
(Performance Gap Increases with More Gradient Steps)
Methods
TD3
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Noise Level (std of Gaussian)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Normalized Reward
Performance vs. Observation Noise Level
TD3
TD3-SF2 = 0.0
TD3-SF2 = 0.99
TD3 Sim
TD3 Sim-Lap
Figure 10: Left: Effect of training budget. IQM of the AUC as we vary the number of gradient
steps dedicated to representation learning, highlighting the gains from additional feature optimization.
Right: Generalization under Gaussian observation noise. Interquartile mean performance of policies
trained for 1M steps (six seeds) when evaluated on Gaussian-noise-perturbed observations. SF2
maintains the highest returns.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Training steps
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Reward
minatar-asterix
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Training steps
minatar-breakout
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Training steps
minatar-freeway
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Training steps
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Reward
minatar-seaquest
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Training steps
minatar-space_invaders
Baseline
SF2( = 0.9) w/o AE
SF2( = 0.9) w AE
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
SF2( = 0.9) w AE
Baseline
SF2( = 0.9) w/o AE
Median
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
IQM
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Mean
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
normalized scores
Optimality Gap
AUC Aggregate Comparison
Figure 11: MinAtar results. Upper: Learning curves for PPO variants on MinAtar environments
with 95th percentile confidence intervals (bootstrap using 5000 samples). Lower: Aggregate IQM
performance. Interquartile mean AUC statistics across MinAtar environments comparing vanilla
PPO, SF2 without autoencoder (w/o AE), and SF2 with autoencoder (w AE).
E
THE USE OF LLMS
The authors used LLMs to polish the language and improve readability. All AI-generated content
was thoroughly reviewed and revised by the authors, who take full responsibility for the final content.
F
EXPERIMENT WITH CRL
We present an additional integration experiment integrating SF2 into Contrastive RL (CRL) on the
Ant locomotion task.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
2
4
6
8
10
Steps (millions)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Eval episode reward
ant (10M steps)
CRL
CRL w SF2
Figure 12: Return curve on Ant environment with CRL (Eysenbach et al., 2022) and CRL with SF2
based on JaxGCRL (Bortkiewicz et al., 2025) (5 seeds).
G
NETWORK ARCHITECTURE AND HYPERPARAMETERS
G.1
TWO GAUSSIAN EXAMPLE IN SECTION A.2
The target distribution is a one-dimensional bimodal Gaussian mixture with means µ1 =−2.0 and
µ2 =2.0, standard deviations σ1 =0.3 and σ2 =0.7, and a mixture weight of 0.01 (i.e. γ =0.99). The
generative model is a two-layer MLP with hidden dimension 256 and ReLU activations. Training
runs for 1500 steps with batch size 32 and learning rate 10−3; an exponential moving average of
the model weights is maintained with decay rate 0.995. Performance is logged every 100 steps and
evaluated every 200 steps. At evaluation time, 4000 samples are generated using 100 numerical
integration steps, and the Wasserstein distance to the true distribution is computed.
G.2
DEEPMIND CONTROL SUITE IN SECTION 4
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: Network and Training Parameters
Parameter
Value
Network Architecture
Hidden Layer Sizes for Q and policy
(512, 512, 512)
Q-Network Layer Normalization
True
Policy Network Layer Normalization
True
Feature Size
512
Zeta Network Hidden Layer Sizes
(512, 512)
Embedding Size
64
Activation Function
ReLU
Kernel Initializer
LeCun Uniform
Training Parameters
Number of Timesteps
5M: CartpoleBalanceSparse, CartpoleSwingupSparse, Fish-
Swim; 10M: Acrobot, Hopper, CheetahRun, Pendulum-
Swingup
Number of Evaluations
100
Reward Scaling
1.0
Max Episode Length
1000
Normalize Observations
True
Action Repeat
1 (4 for PendulumSwingUp)
Learning Rate
1e-3
Number of Environments
128
Batch Size
512
Gradient Updates per Step
8
Max Replay Size
4,194,304 (1048576 * 4)
Min Replay Size
8192
Discounting Factor
0.99
Policy Delay
1
Noise Clip
0.3
Smoothing Noise
0.2
Exploration Noise
0.2
Optimizer Parameters
Alpha Optimizer Learning Rate
3e-4
Policy Optimizer Learning Rate
1e-4
Q-Network Optimizer Learning Rate
1e-4
Psi-Zeta Optimizer Learning Rate
1e-4
Method-Specific Parameters
TD3/SAC Gamma for Successor
0.99
TD3/SAC Tau Zeta
0.005
TD3/SAC Denoising Steps
2 Function Evaluations
22