--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
AURELIUS: RELATION AWARE TEXT-TO-AUDIO
GENERATION AT SCALE
Yuhang He: He Liang; Yash Jain: Andrew Markham; Vibhav Vineet:
: Microsoft Research
; Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Q
Corresponding: yuhanghe@microsoft.com

Code: https://github.com/yuhanghe01/Aurelius
Î
Project: https://yuhanghe01.github.io/Aurelius-Proj/
ABSTRACT
We present Aurelius, a new framework that enables relation aware text-to-
audio (TTA) generation research at scale. Given the lack of essential audio event
and relation corpora, Aurelius contributes a large-scale audio event corpus Audio-
EventSet and another large-scale relation corpus AudioRelSet. Comprising 110
event categories, AudioEventSet maximally covers all commonly heard audio events
and each event is unique, realistic and of high-quality. AudioRelSet consists of 100
relations, comprehensively covering the relations that present in the physical world
or can be neatly described by text. As the two corpora provide audio event and
relation independently, they can be combined to create massive <text,audio>
pairs with our pair generation strategy to support relation aware TTA investigation
at scale. We comprehensively benchmark all existing TTA models from both
general and relation aware evaluation perspective. We further provide an in-depth
investigation into scaling existing TTA models’ relation aware generation by either
training from scratch or leveraging cross-domain general TTA knowledge. The
introduced corpora and the findings from investigation potentially facilitate future
research on relation aware TTA generation.
1
INTRODUCTION
Text-to-audio (hereinafter TTA) generation task aims at generating acoustically high-fidelity audio
whose content is inferred from the input text. Owing to the success of generative modeling (e.g.,
diffusion based (Ho et al., 2020; Xue et al., 2024), score based (Vahdat et al., 2021) and flow matching
based (Lipman et al., 2023; Guan et al., 2024) methods) and the availability of large <text,audio>
pair dataset (e.g., AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017)), we have witnessed
significant advancement in general TTA task in recent years (Ghosal et al., 2023; Hung et al., 2026;
Liu et al., 2024). Despite these achievements, the relation aware TTA generation still remains as a
challenging task as it jointly requires audio event generation and relation modeling. Audio events and
their relation are two fundamental elements humans rely on for holistic acoustic scene understanding
or engaging communication (Zacks et al., 2007; Hirsh et al., 1967; Lake et al., 2015). We humans can
interpret the relation and audio events within the textual description with ease to decide how the target
audio looks like. Enabling TTA models with similar relational reasoning and event interpretation
capability is therefore essential for bridging the gap between relation aware TTA model quality and
human-level crossmodal reasoning.
The recent preliminary investigation by RiTTA (He et al., 2025) already shows the incapability of
existing TTA models in relation aware generation, but the investigation runs on top of small relation
and audio event corpora. The data corpora small scale issue naturally hinders further investigation.
To enable relation aware TTA at scale, we introduce Aurelius, a novel framework that contributes
to relation aware TTA from both dataset benchmark and technical methodology aspects. From
the dataset benchmark aspect, we meticulously curate two large-scale corpora: AudioEventSet and
AudioRelSet. AudioEventSet is an audio event corpus that comprises 110 across fine-grained event
classes across 7 main acoustic categories we commonly hear in our daily lives. In contrast to existing
audio event datasets (Gemmeke et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2019; Fonseca et al., 2022) that are either
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
noisy, polyphonic or label-missing, AudioEventSet provides a coarse-to-fine tree structured audio
event corpus that is both internally distinctive and externally comprehensive. Each individual audio
event in AudioEventSet is high-quality, realistic and intra-class diverse. AudioRelSet is the large-scale
relation corpus with up to 100 detailed relations completely covering the potential relations audio
events may present in the 3D physical world or text can describe succinctly. AudioRelSet is also tree
structured and can be further scaled up to incorporate more relations. Each relation in AudioRelSet
has an “arity” property that is further used to combine relation and audio events together to create
<text,audio> pairs for relation aware TTA task. AudioEventSet and AudioRelSet are orders of
magnitude larger than existing relevant dataset, enabling thorough and in-depth investigation for
relation aware TTA task.
AudioEventSet
1. 110 events
2. 7 main cate
3. hierarchical
…
AudioRelSet
<Text,Audio>
1. unlimited size
2. highly diverse
3. customizable
…
1. 100 relations
2. 6 main cate
3. scalable
…
urelius
Figure 1: Aurelius contributes to relation aware
TTA by introducing an audio event corpus Au-
dioEventSet, a relation corpus AudioRelSet and
<text,audio> pair generation strategy.
Based on the introduced audio event corpus Au-
dioEventSet and relation corpus AudioRelSet,
we further introduce a <text,audio> pair
generation strategy that can generate essential
<text,audio> pairs with both audio event
based and textual description diversity. As the
audio event corpus is disentangled from rela-
tion corpus, our proposed strategy can gener-
ate nearly unlimited <text,audio> pairs tai-
lored for various training requirements. In sum-
mary, as illustrated in Fig. 1, Aurelius advances
relation aware TTA research by contributing
large-scale corpora of audio events and relations,
together with a dedicated framework for relation
aware generation. The explicit disentanglement
of audio events and relations, the hierarchical
tree-structured design of each corpus, and the
systematic <text,audio> creation strategy collectively provide a strong foundation for curating
essential datasets in this domain. Building on this foundation, our proposed AudioRelGen framework
tackles relation aware TTA by decoupling audio event modeling from relation modeling, offering an
essential first step toward structured audio generation. We believe this work will not only establish
a new benchmark for relation aware TTA but also inspire future research on modeling complex
event–relation dynamics in sound.
2
RELATED WORK
Text-to-Audio Generation aims at generating the audio waveform that semantically aligns well with
the input text. The fast development of generative modeling techniques (Ho et al., 2020; Vahdat
et al., 2021; Lipman et al., 2023) in recent years has largely advanced the TTA generation in terms
of high-fidelity and high-intelligibility (Liu et al., 2024; 2023; Kreuk et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022;
Ghosal et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2024), alongside other crossmodal generation tasks including but not
limited to text-to-music (TTM, e.g., MusicGen (Copet et al., 2023) and MusicLM (Agostinelli et al.,
2023)), image-to-audio (I2A, e.g., RegNet (Chen et al., 2020), Img2Wav (Sheffer & Adi, 2023) and
SpecVQGAN (Iashin & Rahtu, 2021) and text-to-image (T2I). Although the promising achievement
in generating realistic and semantically text-aligned audio, existing TTA methods still perform poorly
in relation aware TTA generation. Prior work like RiTTA (He et al., 2025) and CompA (Ghosh
et al., 2024) have preliminarily explored relation aware TTA and shown the incapability of existing
TTA methods through limited audio event and relation corpora, which inevitably hinders future
investigation at scale. Moreover, publicly available audio event corpora (AudioSet) are directly
collected from either online video data or audio sharing platform without proper quality check,
resulting in audio events being label-missing, noisy and ambiguous. Our work circumvents these
barriers by introducing a meticulously curated audio event corpus AudioEventSet that is high-quality,
distinctive and realistic, potentially covering all commonly heard audio events.
Relation Modeling has been widely discussed within modalities, including images (Liu et al., 2022;
Zerroug et al., 2022), natural language processing (Wadhwa et al., 2023), and acoustics (Xie et al.,
2025a; Ghosh et al., 2024; He et al., 2025). In the context of 2D images, the objects of interest can
exhibit compositional and spatial relations (Liu et al., 2022; Zerroug et al., 2022). In the context of the
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3D physical world, an audio event is the most fundamental acoustic signal, and multiple audio events
join together to represent the 3D physical world via more sophisticated relations than image-based
relations, ranging from basic spatial, temporal, and perceptual relations to their nested combinations.
Prior works (Xie et al., 2025a; Ghosh et al., 2024; He et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025b) have discussed
audio-event relations at small scale and with minimal complexity, making them hard to scale up
to accommodate the potential relation complexity present in either the 3D physical environment or
textual descriptions. To fill this gap, we curate AudioRelSet, a large-scale relation corpus that reflects
the relations potentially present in the physical world and can be neatly described by text.
Text-to-Audio Generation Techniques. Existing TTA methods can be divided into two main
categories: early methods are diffusion based (Liu et al., 2024; 2023; Kreuk et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2022; Ghosal et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024), while recent methods are flow-matching
based (He et al., 2025; Hung et al., 2026; Guan et al., 2024). Flow-matching methods are usually
faster during both training and inference and can yield better performance than diffusion-based
methods. We comprehensively benchmark these methods on our introduced corpora and further
provide an in-depth investigation to reveal potential ways to scale up existing TTA methods’ relation
aware capability.
3
AURELIUS BENCHMARK: AUDIOEVENTSET AND AUDIORELSET
3.1
AUDIO EVENT CORPUS: AudioEventSet
Table 1: Audio Event Dataset Comparison.
Dataset
Characteristic
AudioSet (2017)
polyphonic,
ambiguous,
noisy, label-missing
FSD50K (2022)
AudioCaps (2019)
AudioTime (2025a)
AudioEventSet
distinctive, high-quality,
clean, hierarchical
coarse-to-fine
intra-class diversity
inter-class discriminative
An audio event refers to an auditory signal oc-
curring over a specific period of time, typically
representing an independent, human-recognizable
sound. To support relation aware TTA research,
the desired audio-event corpus should be: 1. di-
verse enough to maximally accommodate the wide
variety of audio events potentially present in the
3D physical world; 2. clean and high-fidelity to
enable reliable in-depth technical investigation;
3. distinctive so that events can be easily distin-
guished without ambiguity; 4. hierarchically orga-
nized with respect to genre to enable investigation
at different granularity. After thorough investiga-
tion of existing audio-event datasets, however, we
find that all existing datasets fall short of these four properties. As shown in Table 1, existing audio-
event datasets (e.g., AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017), AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), AudioTime (Xie
et al., 2025a), and FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2022)) are noisy, label-missing, polyphonic (multiple
events temporally overlap), or semantically ambiguous (multiple event classes correspond to the same
audio). To address this dilemma, we introduce AudioEventSet, a meticulously curated audio-event
corpus that is intrinsically clean, diverse, distinctive, and hierarchically organized.
AudioEventSet ontology is tree-structured with depth three. From the root node to the leaf node,
each audio event is organized in a coarse-to-fine granularity. As shown in Fig. 2 and Table I in the
Appendix, we build on RiTTA (He et al., 2025) to categorize AudioEventSet into 7 main categories:
five singular-source categories Animal, Human, Machinery, Music, and Nature, and two interaction-
based categories, Human-Object and Object-Object interactions. The seven categories maximally
cover commonly heard audio events in the 3D physical world. Each main category is associated with
multiple subcategories, each of which is further associated with multiple fine-grained event classes.
For example, the Human main category contains human voice, human speech, hands action, group
action, and locomotion subcategories, comprehensively categorizing human-centered audio events
from various aspects.
During AudioEventSet ontology construction, we guarantee each curated audio event is distinctive,
unique, and human-distinguishable. An audio event emitting ambiguous or nondistinctive audio is
discarded. For example, engine idling in AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017) audio differs significantly
across engines, and it is easily confused with other audio events such as working fan and hairdryer. We
thus exclude all of them from the corpus. Moreover, we account for audio event source origin, event
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Unary
Binary
Ternary
N-ary
?
Nested Relation
Combination
Audio Event
Audio Event
AudioRelSet
AudioEventSet
Human
Animal
Machinery
Human-Obj
Interaction
Music
Obj-Obj
Interaction
Nature
tool
work
domestic
wild
water
weather
voice
speech
friction
dropping
instrument
singing
alarm
mechanism
Count
Perceptuality
Compositionality
Nested Combination
Spatiality
Temporality
negation implication
blending
succession
count
implication + succession
farness
A. AudioEventSet Corpus Ontology Visualization
accordion
harmonica
car horn
door bell
B. AudioRelSet Corpus Ontology Visualization
C. Relation Arity Illustration
Figure 2: AudioEventSet and AudioRelSet corpora illustration: we visualize the AudioEventSet
ontology in sub-figure A. It is tree-structured with depth 3 and contains 7 main categories and 110
event categories (leaf nodes) in total. We show only part of the leaf nodes (with a red dotted arrow)
for clarity. The detailed event ontology is given in Table I in the Appendix. The AudioRelSet ontology
is shown in sub-figure B; it is tree-structured with depth 2 and contains 6 main categories and 100
categories in total. The detailed relation ontology is given in Table II in the Appendix. In sub-figure C,
we conceptually illustrate the relation “arity”, which is used to connect relations and audio events to
generate audio.
category, and the physical mechanisms of audio generation in AudioEventSet ontology construction.
For example, in the Object-Object main category, we exhaustively consider impact, friction, dropping,
and explosion mechanisms. In summary, we have curated 110 audio events, which is four times larger
than the audio-event corpus proposed in RiTTA (He et al., 2025); each leaf audio event is associated
with around 75 realistic audio snippets ranging from 1 s to 5 s.
For each leaf-node audio event, we collect exemplar audio from either the copyright-free
freesound.org platform or FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2022).
As most audio from
freesound.org and FSD50K 1 are real recordings shared by volunteers across the globe, the
collected audio for each event is diverse and realistic enough to reflect audio events in the physical
world. Manual verification is adopted to ensure content correctness and label consistency. We argue
that the curated AudioEventSet can be applied to tasks beyond TTA, and we anticipate much wider
usage of the dataset.
3.2
RELATION CORPUS: AudioRelSet
AudioRelSet
Prior works (Xie et al., 2025a; He et al., 2025; Ghosh et al., 2024) have explored audio-event relations
from various perspectives, but only at small scale. For example, AudioTime (Xie et al., 2025a)
and CompA (Ghosh et al., 2024) discuss temporal relations. RiTTA (He et al., 2025) additionally
introduces spatial, compositional, and count relations, resulting in a total of 11 relations. In this
section, we introduce AudioRelSet, a meticulously curated large-scale relation corpus with up to
100 distinct relations. To ensure AudioRelSet exhibits real-scenario practicability, text-manageable
complexity, and relation scalability, we follow three guidelines to curate AudioRelSet: 1. maximally
cover the potential relations audio events can present in the 3D physical world; 2. include sufficient
relation complexity while still being efficiently and neatly described by text; 3. allow the relation
corpus to scale up to accommodate more sophisticated relations. To this end, we construct six
fundamental relation categories, in which four main relations describe relations present in the 3D
physical world, one focuses on a TTA model’s logical reasoning capability, and the last derives from
nested combinations of the five main relations.
AudioRelSet ontology is tree-structured with depth 2. The root node connects six main relations, each
of which further associates with multiple sub-relations. Let E “ tE1, E2, . . . , Emu denote the audio
events in AudioEventSet introduced in Sec. 3.1, and let R “ tR1, R2, . . . , Rnu denote the relations
to be constructed. AudioRelSet is represented as follows:
1. Temporality describes the sequence or overlap of audio events in the time domain; it contains
four sub-relations: Precedence: E1 ă E2 (event E1 occurs before E2); Succession: E1 ą E2 (event
E1 occurs after E2); Simultaneity: E1 ∥E2 (E1 and E2 occur concurrently); Repetitiveness: „ E1
(event E1 occurs repetitively in the time domain).
1FSD50K (Fonseca et al., 2022) data is also sourced from freesound.org
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2. Spatiality defines the relative spatial positions or motion status between or within audio events;
it contains five sub-relations: Proximity: dpE1, E2q ď τ (E1 and E2 are within distance τ); Close-
ness: dpE1q ă dpE2q (E1 is closer than E2); Farness: dpE1q ą dpE2q (E1 is farther than E2);
Approaching:
d
dtdE1ptq ă 0 (E1 is moving closer); Departing:
d
dtdE1ptq ą 0 (E1 is moving away).
3. Count focuses on the number of audio events that take place within a period of time: Count:
|E| “ N, N P Z`. (the cardinality of E is the number).
4. Perceptuality introduces six acoustic effects to an audio event,
• Balancing: RbalancepE1, E2, σq (level balance between E1 and E2 by balancing factor σ, so that
one event dominates and the other serves as the background audio).
• Blending: RblendpE1, E2, θq (mix E1 and E2 together by factor θ so as to be indistinguishable).
• Reverberation: RreverbpE1q applies a reverberation effect to E1, as if it is heard in a canyon.
• Time-stretching: RstretchpE1, αq, where α is the time-stretching factor and E1 sounds slower.
• Amplification: RamppE1, βq, where β is the amplification factor and E1 sounds louder.
• Attenuation: RattpE1, γq, where γ is the attenuation factor and E1 sounds quieter.
5. Compositionality indicates the logical operations within audio events that TTA models need to
reason about before deciding what audio events to generate. It contains five sub-relations.
• Conjunction: E1 ^ E2 (both events occur).
• Disjunction: E1 _ E2 (at least one event occurs, or both occur).
• Negation: ␣E1 (the absence of the event E1 in the generated audio).
• Exclusive Or: pE1 _ E2q ^ ␣pE1 ^ E2q (either E1 or E2 occur, but not both).
• Implication: E1 ñ E2, ␣E1 ñ E3 (if E1 occurs, then E2 occurs; otherwise, E3 occurs).
6. Nested Combination is a hierarchical structuring of multiple basic relations (e.g., the aforemen-
tioned Temporality, Spatiality), such that the output of one relation serves as the input or context
for another, forming a directed acyclic relation structure. Nested combination allows for capturing
complex relation interactions among audio events. For example, by nesting Implication, Approaching
and Conjunction, we can generate a more complex text prompt showing below,
Nest Combination Example: Implication, Approaching and Conjunction
If generated both {A} event and {B} event, Ñ Conjunction
then continue to generate {C} audio event,
else just generate {D} audio event that is gradually approaching close. ÑApproaching
Mathematically, the relation RnestedpEq resulting from nested combination can be represented as,
RnestedpEq “ RnpRn´1p. . . R2pR1pEqq . . . qq
(1)
Temporality
Spatiality
Count
Perceptuality
Compositionality
Nested Combination
Unary
Binary
Ternary
Quaternary
Quinary
9
40
17
12
26
more relations with
higher arity by
nested combination
Senary
Septenary
Arity
Relation
main-relation arity
coverage
sub-relation number
w.r.t. arity
Figure 3: Arity coverage in AudioRelSet.
where E “ te1, e2, . . . , emu represents a finite
set of audio events. We combine relations aris-
ing from the introduced 5 basic relations to con-
struct nested combination relations and have cre-
ated 79 nested combination relations.
It is worth noting that nested combinations are
scalable, and we can theoretically construct
more complex nested relations (even infinite
relations) by involving more basic relations in
the nesting process. In this work, we constrain
nested combinations to involve at most five au-
dio events (Quinary). It remains a future re-
search topic to explore more complex nested
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
combinations, and the key challenge is how to
construct concise and precise textual descriptions for highly complex nested relations. Moreover,
during the nesting process, we explicitly run internal logical-correctness and feasibility checks before
accepting a nested relation; any nested relation that violates these rules is abandoned. For example,
the combination of Count and Conjunction internally equals Count.
Relation Arity. each relation in AudioRelSet is associated with an “arity” property, which indicates
the audio event number it requires to represent the relation. The visual illustration of arity is shown
in Fig. 2 C. The arity coverage across AudioRelSet main relation categories is given in Fig, 3, from
which we can see that the arity ranges from 1 to 5 (unary to quinary) and most main relation cuts
across multiple arities. Moreover, the construction of more complex relations introduces higher arity.
We use “arity” to create <text,audio> pairs (see Sec. 3.3) and experiment evaluation (see Sec. 4).
3.3
TEXT-AUDIO PAIR CREATION: <Text, Audio>
or
rel2text templatization
Spatiality
AudioRelSet
Compositionality
implication
closeness
Animal
Machinery
mechanism
livestock
AudioEventSet
paper printing
cow mooing
1. if generated {A}, then generate
{B}, else generate {C};
5. should {A} be created, proceed
to create {B}, otherwise create {C}
audio 1
audio 3
audio n
audio 2
audio m
create paper printing if cow mooing is
created; otherwise, create goat bleating.
audio 1
audio 2
audio 3
<Text, Audio>
event instantiation
instantiated text
instantiated audio
Figure 4: <text,audio> pair generation illus-
tration, which can generate nearly unlimited pairs
with high diversity.
With the constructed audio event corpus in
Sec. 3.1 and relation corpus in Sec. 3.2,
we
can
further
construct
relation
aware
<text,audio> pairs.
Specifically, as is
shown in Fig. 4, we first associate each of the
100 relations in the relation corpus with metic-
ulously curated 5 text description templates. We
either manually write or query GPT-4o to gen-
erate 5 text prompt templates precisely describ-
ing the relation and accommodating the large
language usage variation (see Fig. 4 line 4-8).
Each template contains audio events name place-
holder, we instantiate the template by replacing
the placeholder with real audio event name to
obtain the text prompt. To accommodate the
synonymy of audio event name, we maintain a
synonym list for each audio event name, and ran-
domly select one each time when instantiating
the template. For example, the audio event name “hammer nailing” can be synonymously replaced
by one of [hitting, slapping, smacking, punching].
To accurately describe the audio event with text, we adopt the “Head-Modifier Structure with
Progressive Verb Form” approach. In this approach, the description begins with the subject or entity
producing the audio (e.g., “food”) as the head, emphasizing the primary source of the sound. The
action is then specified using its present participle form (e.g., “frying”) as the modifier to convey a
sense of immediacy and highlight that the audio event is ongoing. For instance, instead of describing
a sound as “frying food” or “fry food” it is labeled as “food frying audio,” where the subject (“food”)
is foregrounded, and the action (“frying”) contextualizes the nature of the audio. This approach
ensures clarity, aligns with the temporal context of the audio, and effectively captures the dynamic
nature of the event. With the same audio events name, we can retrieve its relevant audio waveform
data and generate the audio by following the relation (He et al., 2025).
4
EXPERIMENT
4.1
DATASET CONSTRUCTION
Following the common setup in existing TTA model, the created audio is 10 second long with
sampling rate 16 kHz. Based on the data creation method introduced in Sec. 3.3, in the training
phase we randomly construct 360 <text,audio> pairs for each relation, resulting in 36,000 pairs
in total. In the testing phase, we randomly construct 100 <text,audio> pairs for each relation,
ensuring that no constructed pairs appear in the training dataset. Following prior TTA model settings,
we set each audio sample to 10 seconds with a 16 kHz sampling rate; the training dataset is 100 hours,
and the testing dataset is 28 hours. Since we decouple relations from audio events during dataset
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
construction, and the training texts differ from the testing texts, the constructed training and testing
<text,audio> pairs have no overlap and differ significantly.
4.2
EVALUATION METRIC
We use both classic general evaluation metrics and relation aware evaluation metrics. For general
evaluation, we follow traditional TTA works (Liu et al., 2024; 2023; Ghosal et al., 2023; Majumder
et al., 2024) and adopt three metrics: Fr´echet Audio Distance (FAD), Fr´echet Distance (FD) (Heusel
et al., 2017), and Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. These three metrics measure the overall
similarity in embedding space between reference audio and generated target audio without explicitly
taking relations into account. Specifically, following prior TTA works, we extract embeddings from
the VGGish (Hershey et al., 2017) model for FAD and KL, and embeddings from the PANNs (Kong
et al., 2020) model for FD.
For relation aware evaluation, we adopt the multi-stage relation aware (MSR) evaluation protocol
introduced in RiTTA (He et al., 2025). In the MSR protocol, we first explicitly extract audio events
and relations pE1, R1q from generated audio, and then compare them with reference audio events and
relations pE, Rq. To reflect whether the model has generated, and only generated, the designated audio
events and relations, MSR adopts Presence, Relation correctness, and Parsimony scores to gauge the
quality of generated audio from different perspectives. Specifically, we report mAPre, mARel, and
mAPar scores for either individual relations or all relations. More detailed information about the
MSR metric can be found in RiTTA (He et al., 2025). To extract audio events from generated audio,
we fine-tune an audio event detection and tagging model on top of the pre-trained PANNs (Kong et al.,
2020) model with a 1-million-sample training dataset. The mAP on a 100,000-sample testing dataset
reaches 0.91 for audio event detection, ensuring the fine-tuned model can extract all potential audio
events with high precision. To classify acoustic effects, we train another seven-class acoustic-effects
classifier on top of the pre-trained PANNs model with a 1-million-sample training dataset. The
accuracy on a 100 k testing dataset reaches 95%.
4.3
BENCHMARKING METHODS
We exhaustively benchmark 9 of the most recent general TTA models: AudioLDM (Liu et al.,
2023), AudioLDM 2 (Liu et al., 2024), MakeAnAudio (Huang et al., 2023), AudioGen (Kreuk et al.,
2023), Tango (Ghosal et al., 2023), Tango 2 Majumder et al. (2024), LAFMA (Guan et al., 2024),
Auffusion (Xue et al., 2024), and TangoFlux (Hung et al., 2026). These models are pre-trained on
general TTA datasets (Gemmeke et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2019). For benchmarking, we use their
released checkpoints to generate 10 second audio from text prompts; detailed configurations are
provided in Table III in the Appendix.
We further benchmark two agentic workflow based methods, in which we leverage an open-source
Qwen-family LLM as an agent to analyze the input text and output the separate audio events a TTA
model needs to generate. The purpose of experimenting with this agentic workflow is to see whether
we can decompose the relation aware generation task into simpler single-audio-event generation tasks.
Detailed implementation of the agentic workflow is provided in Appendix .3.
4.4
BENCHMARKING RESULT ON EXISTING TTA MODELS
The benchmarking results are shown in Table 2, from which we observe that all existing TTA models
perform poorly on relation aware TTA generation. Similar to RiTTA (He et al., 2025), we also find a
contradictory evaluation outcome between general evaluation and relation-aware evaluation, which
highlights the specificity of the relation-aware TTA task. Among all benchmarking methods, Audio-
Gen (Kreuk et al., 2023) and TangoFlux (Hung et al., 2026) perform best. While AudioGen (Kreuk
et al., 2023) achieves the best mAPar (relation parsimony) and mAMSR, TangoFlux (Hung et al.,
2026) is best in mAPre and mARel, which means it excels at accurately generating the target audio
events and corresponding relations. However, almost all benchmarking methods achieve less than
a 10% accuracy rate across all relation aware evaluation metrics, which in turn verifies the need to
introduce a new large-scale benchmark tailored for relation aware TTA research.
Furthermore, both agentic-flow baselines perform poorly; they are substantially worse than most
existing TTA approaches. This poor performance highlights a critical limitation: simply scaling up
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 2: Quantitative benchmarking result on our introduced benchmark. mAPre, mARel and mAPar
are in 10´2. mAPre and mARel can be treated as presence, relation correctness percentage ratio,
they lie in range r0, 100s. mAPar score also lies within r0, 100s. mAMSR (%) lies in range r0, 1s
.
Eval
Way
Model
#Param
General Evaluation
Relation Aware Evaluation %(Ò)
FAD Ó KL Ó
FD Ó
mAPre mARel mAPar
mAMSR
Zero-Shot
AudioLDM (s-full) 2023
185 M
4.02
21.23
22.36
3.47
0.91
2.95
0.73
AudioLDM (l-full) 2023
739 M
4.13
22.05
23.03
3.10
0.79
2.63
0.63
AudioLDM 2 (l-full) 2024
844 M
4.54
22.90
30.53
0.35
0.04
0.31
0.03
MakeAnAudio 2023
452 M
5.10
50.97
30.49
4.75
0.88
4.05
0.73
AudioGen 2023
1.5 B
7.97
25.19
32.29
11.3
2.84
9.13
2.22
LAFMA 2024
272 M
25.85 269.54
65.27
0.96
0.15
0.45
0.07
Auffusion 2024
1.1 B
4.13
42.59
31.17
6.71
1.41
4.07
0.79
Tango 2023
866 M
7.47
64.10
28.28
4.46
0.98
3.67
0.79
Tango 2 2024
866 M
9.59
65.24
35.50
9.68
2.48
5.49
1.29
TangoFlux 2026
576 M
6.01
26.73
30.00
12.38
3.34
7.28
1.77
Agen
tic
Qwen2 7B+TangoFlux
-
9.98
142.87
39.20
3.53
0.77
2.25
0.04
Qwen2.5 32B+TangoFlux
-
9.70
140.56
38.65
3.79
0.96
2.41
0.60
current TTA methods without fundamentally enhancing their relation aware modeling capability is
unlikely to succeed. In this light, the benchmark introduced in this paper is not merely a comparison
tool but a catalyst, providing the necessary structure, evaluation, and motivation to drive genuine
advances in relation aware TTA research.
4.5
TWO INTUITIVE WAYS TO IMPROVE RELATION AWARE MODELING
Table 3:
Quantitative result comparison on testset between finetuning and training from
scratch (scratch) on curated 100 hours dataset.
Train
Strategy
Model
#Param
General Evaluation
Relation Aware Evaluation %(Ò)
FAD Ó KL Ó
FD Ó
mAPre mARel mAPar
mAMSR
finetuning
Tango 2023
866 M
3.88
33.26
21.30
14.58
4.18
10.16
2.73
Tango 2 2024
866 M
4.06
22.39
20.32
15.53
4.63
10.21
2.86
TangoFlux 2026
576 M
1.29
9.68
16.44
28.57
8.02
20.84
5.58
scratch
Tango 2023
866 M
3.63
22.34
20.16
14.89
3.69
10.98
2.64
TangoFlux 2026
576 M
1.64
17.82
11.72
16.68
3.82
12.01
2.58
Method
Waveform
Spectrum
Reference
TangoFlux
finetuned
TangoFlux
zero-shot
Text Prompt: At the beginning, generate applause sound that
is spatially distant, then continue to generate the same
applause sound that is spatially close.
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison be-
tween zero-shot and finetune based Tan-
goFlux inference on one text prompt.
Two intuitive strategies to enhance relation aware mod-
eling in existing TTA methods are (i) fine-tuning on our
curated dataset and (ii) training from scratch. This dual
perspective not only tests the feasibility of our benchmark
but also evaluates the potential to transfer general TTA-
domain knowledge into relation-aware settings. To this
end, we apply both training strategies to three representa-
tive baselines: Tango (Ghosal et al., 2023), Tango 2 (Ma-
jumder et al., 2024), and TangoFlux (Hung et al., 2026).
The results in Table 3 reveal a clear trend: both fine-tuning
and training from scratch substantially improve relation-
aware performance, validating the effectiveness of our
benchmark as a testing ground for relation-aware TTA.
Notably, TangoFlux benefits the most from fine-tuning,
indicating that cross-domain TTA knowledge can be ef-
fectively transferred to relation aware tasks. In contrast,
Tango shows little difference between the two strategies,
suggesting that model architecture and inductive bias may
affect the extent to which general TTA knowledge can be leveraged. These findings highlight our
benchmark’s unique role in uncovering such model-specific behaviors and point to an open research
direction: how to best exploit general TTA knowledge to scale up relation-aware TTA, and conversely,
how relation aware training can reciprocally improve general TTA. We visualize the generated audio
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Compositionality
Perceptuality
Arity 1
TangoFlux
AudioGen
Tango 2
Figure 6: mAMSR regarding 6 main relation cat-
egory and 5 relation Arity in Zero-shot setting.
Compositionality
Perceptuality
TangoFlux
Tango
Tango 2
Arity 1
Figure 7: mAMSR regarding 6 main relation cat-
egory and 5 relation Arity in finetuning setting.
comparison between TangoFlux in zero-shot and fine-tuned inference modes in Fig. 5; this figure
clearly shows that fine-tuning on our curated dataset benefits relation aware modeling.
mAMSR % 
Hours 
100
200
300
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
Scratch
Finetune
Figure 8: mAMSR variation w.r.t. train-
ing data size (100 h, 200 h and 300 h).
To further investigate the role of training data size, we
extend both finetuning and training-from-scratch experi-
ments to larger datasets of 200 hours and 300 hours. As
shown in Fig. 8, the mAMSR trend reveals two distinct
behaviors: finetuning yields strong early gains but quickly
saturates as the data size approaches 300 hours, whereas
training from scratch continues to improve substantially
with increasing data. This divergence underscores an im-
portant insight: scaling relation aware TTA models ulti-
mately requires massive datasets, and reliance on finetun-
ing alone may be insufficient for long-term progress. Our
benchmark is therefore essential: it not only provides the
controlled scaling environment needed to expose these
trends, but also offers the first practical platform to system-
atically study how training strategy and data size interact
in advancing relation aware TTA.
We visualize mAMSR across 5 main relation categories and relation arities for three strong methods
in the zero-shot setting (Fig. 6) and the finetuning setting (Fig. 7). From these two figures, we observe
that finetuning generally improves relation aware modeling capability. In the zero-shot setting,
AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2023) performs better than the other two on main categories including
Temporality, Count, and Perceptuality. In the finetuning setting, TangoFlux (Hung et al., 2026)
becomes the best-performing method. However, all methods in both settings perform poorly on
Nested Combination or arity greater than 1. Our proposed benchmark enables researchers to tackle
these challenges at scale.
4.6
MORE INVESTIGATION INTO EXISTING TTA MODELS
Table 4: Audio event and relation accuracy of
TangoFlux generation under different setting.
Description
Accu.
Event (single event, no relation)
75%
Event ( multi-event, relation aware)
12%
Relation (multi-event, relation aware)
3%
Relation aware TTA demands not only the correct
presence of target audio events but also the faithful
preservation of their underlying relations. However,
current TTA methods (Hung et al., 2026; Ghosal et al.,
2023; Xue et al., 2024) remain narrowly focused on
single-event generation, leaving them ill-equipped
to handle multi-event, relation-aware prompts. Ta-
ble 4 makes this gap explicit: while TangoFlux (Hung
et al., 2026), the state-of-the-art general TTA model,
achieves 75% accuracy on single-event prompts, its performance collapses to just 12% for multi-event
correctness and a mere 3% for relation fidelity. This dramatic degradation exposes a fundamental
blind spot in existing approaches: relation aware modeling is virtually unaddressed. Our benchmark
directly targets this deficiency, offering the first systematic platform to quantify and dissect these
failures. By doing so, it not only diagnoses the shortcomings of current TTA methods but also
establishes the essential foundation for driving genuine advances in relation-aware TTA.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
This work presents Aurelius as a benchmark-centric foundation for advancing relation aware text-to-
audio (TTA) generation. Across extensive zero-shot and adapted evaluations, we show that existing
general-purpose TTA models remain fundamentally weak at relation modeling: while they can
often produce plausible single events, performance drops sharply when prompts require multi-event
composition, relational consistency, and higher-arity reasoning. This gap confirms that relation
fidelity is not a minor extension of general TTA quality, but a distinct capability that current methods
do not reliably learn.
To address this bottleneck, Aurelius contributes two complementary resources: AudioEventSet (110
clean, diverse, hierarchically structured events) and AudioRelSet (100 relations with explicit arity
and compositional structure): together with a scalable <text,audio> pair construction pipeline
and unified evaluation protocol. The benchmark enables controlled analysis across relation type,
complexity, training strategy, and data scale, and therefore supports both diagnosis and method
development.
We expect Aurelius to serve as a common testbed for relation aware generation, structured prompting,
agentic decomposition, and new architectures that explicitly model event-relation dependencies. We
also anticipate broader reuse in adjacent tasks within and beyond audio based machine learning.
For example, AudioEventSet can be potentially used for adjacent acoustic tasks such as acoustic
scene understanding, sound event detection and localization (He et al., 2021) and spatial audio
modeling (He et al., 2024); AudioRelSet can benefit relation modeling in other research comunities
including computer vision, natural language processing and multimodality. In short, Aurelius
establishes a rigorous, extensible starting point for the next stage of structured TTA research, with the
potential to motivate and advance other relevant research questions.
6
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We sincerely thank the reviewers for their constructive feedback and thoughtful engagement with this
work, particularly for encouraging detailed clarifications during the multi-round discussion. Their
input is invaluable for improving both the quality and clarity of this work.
REFERENCES
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I Denk, Zal´an Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. MusicLM: Generating
Music from Text. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325, 2023. 2
Peihao Chen, Yang Zhang, Mingkui Tan, Hongdong Xiao, Deng Huang, and Chuang Gan. Generating
Visually Aligned Sound from Videos. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing (TIP), 2020. 2
Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexan-
dre D´efossez. Simple and Controllable Music Generation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. 2
Eduardo Fonseca, Xavier Favory, Jordi Pons, Frederic Font, and Xavier Serra. FSD50K: an Open
Dataset of Human-labeled Sound Events. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing (TASLP), 30:829–852, 2022. 1, 3, 4
J. F. Gemmeke, D. P. W. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen, W. Lawrence, R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and
M. Ritter. Audio Set: An Ontology and Human-Labeled Dataset for Audio Events. In IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017. 1, 3, 7
Deepanway Ghosal, Navonil Majumder, Ambuj Mehrish, and Soujanya Poria.
Text-to-Audio
Generation using Instruction Tuned LLM and Latent Diffusion Model. In ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (ACMMM), 2023. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 17
Sreyan Ghosh, Ashish Seth, Sonal Kumar, Utkarsh Tyagi, Chandra Kiran Reddy Evuru, Ra-
maneswaran S, S Sakshi, Oriol Nieto, Ramani Duraiswami, and Dinesh Manocha. CompA:
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Addressing the Gap in Compositional Reasoning in Audio-Language Models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. 2, 3, 4
Wenhao Guan, Kaidi Wang, Wangjin Zhou, Yang Wang, Feng Deng, Hui Wang, Lin Li, Qingyang
Hong, and Yong Qin. LAFMA: A Latent Flow Matching Model for Text-to-Audio Generation. In
Interspeech, 2024. 1, 3, 7, 8, 17
Yuhang He, Niki Trigoni, and Andrew Markham. SoundDet: Polyphonic Moving Sound Event
Detection and Localization from Raw Waveform.
In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2021. 10
Yuhang He, Anoop Cherian, Gordon Wichern, and Andrew Markham. Deep Neural Room Acoustics
Primitive. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024. 10
Yuhang He, Yash Jain, Xubo Liu, Andrew Markham, and Vibhav Vineet. RiTTA: Modeling Event
Relations in Text-to-Audio Generation. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), 2025. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 16
Shawn Hershey, Sourish Chaudhuri, Daniel P. W. Ellis, Jort F. Gemmeke, Aren Jansen, Channing
Moore, Manoj Plakal, Devin Platt, Rif A. Saurous, Bryan Seybold, Malcolm Slaney, Ron Weiss,
and Kevin Wilson. CNN Architectures for Large-Scale Audio Classification. In International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017. 7
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017. 7
IJ Hirsh, C Milliman, and F Darley. Brain Mechanisms Underlying Speech and Language, 1967. 1
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 1, 2
Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Dongchao Yang, Yi Ren, Luping Liu, Mingze Li, Zhenhui Ye, Jinglin
Liu, Xiang Yin, and Zhou Zhao. Make-an-audio: Text-to-audio Generation with Prompt-enhanced
Diffusion Models. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 7, 8, 17
Chia-Yu Hung, Navonil Majumder, Zhifeng Kong, Ambuj Mehrish, Rafael Valle, Bryan Catanzaro,
and Soujanya Poria. TangoFlux: Super Fast and Faithful Text to Audio Generation with Flow
Matching and Clap-Ranked Preference Optimization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026. 1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 14, 17
Vladimir Iashin and Esa Rahtu. Taming Visually Guided Sound Generation. In British Machine
Vision Conference (BMVC), 2021. 2
Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Audiocaps: Generating
captions for audios in the wild. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2019. 1, 3, 7
Qiuqiang Kong, Yin Cao, Turab Iqbal, Yuxuan Wang, Wenwu Wang, and Mark Plumbley. PANNS:
Large-Scale Pretrained Audio Neural Networks for Audio Pattern Recognition. In IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing (TASLP), 2020. 7
Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre D´efossez, Jade Copet,
Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. Audiogen: Textually Guided Audio Generation.
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 17
Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Human-level Concept Learning
hrough Probabilistic Program Induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015. 1
Huan Liao, Haonan Han, Kai Yang, Tianjiao Du, Rui Yang, Zunnan Xu, Qinmei Xu, Jingquan
Liu, Jiasheng Lu, and Xiu Li. BATON: Aligning Text-to-Audio Model with Human Preference
Feedback. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2024. 2, 3
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow Match-
ing for Generative Modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2023. 1, 2
Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D
Plumbley. AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models. International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. 2, 3, 7, 8, 17
Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Xubo Liu, Xinhao Mei, Qiuqiang Kong, Qiao Tian, Yuping Wang, Wenwu
Wang, Yuxuan Wang, and Mark D. Plumbley. AudioLDM 2: Learning Holistic Audio Generation
With Self-Supervised Pretraining. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing (TASLP), 2024. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional Vi-
sual Generation with Composable Diffusion Models. In European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), 2022. 2
Navonil Majumder, Chia-Yu Hung, Deepanway Ghosal, Wei-Ning Hsu, Rada Mihalcea, and Soujanya
Poria. Tango 2: Aligning Diffusion-based Text-to-Audio Generations Through Direct Preference
Optimization. In ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACMMM), 2024. 7, 8, 17
Roy Sheffer and Yossi Adi. I Hear Your True Colors: Image Guided Audio Generation. In IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023. 2
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based Generative Modeling in Latent Space. In
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. 1, 2
Somin Wadhwa, Silvio Amir, and Byron C. Wallace. Revisiting relation extraction in the era of large
language models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2023. 2
Zeyu Xie, Xuenan Xu, Zhizheng Wu, and Mengyu Wu. AudioTime: A Temporally-aligned Audio-
Text Benchmark Dataset. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP), 2025a. 2, 3, 4
Zeyu Xie, Xuenan Xu, Zhizheng Wu, and Mengyue Wu. PicoAudio: Enabling Precise Temporal
Controllability in Text-to-Audio Generation. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2025b. 3
Jinlong Xue, Yayue Deng, Yingming Gao, and Ya Li. Auffusion: Leveraging the Power of Diffusion
and Large Language Models for Text-to-Audio Generation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing (TASLP), 2024. 1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 17
Dongchao Yang, Jianwei Yu, Helin Wang, Wen Wang, Chao Weng, Yuexian Zou, and Dong Yu.
Diffsound: Discrete Diffusion Model for Text-to-sound Generation. IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech and Language Processing, 2022. 2, 3
Jeffrey M Zacks, Nicole K Speer, Khena M Swallow, Todd S Braver, and Jeremy R Reynolds. Event
Perception: A Mind-Brain Perspective, 2007. 1
Aimen Zerroug, Mohit Vaishnav, Julien Colin, Sebastian Musslick, and Thomas Serre. A Bench-
mark for Compositional Visual Reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS), 2022. 2
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
APPENDIX
.1
AUDIOEVENTSET DETAIL
The detail of AudioEventSet is given in Table I.
.2
AUDIORELSET DETAIL
The detail of AudioRelSet is given in Table II.
.3
AGENTIC WORKFLOW
The agentic workflow operates in three stages:
1. Planning Given the input text and the audio length to be generated, we query LLM to convert the
input text into a JSON-formatted plan. The prompt is provided below:
Planner Prompt
You are an audio scene planner for relation aware text-to-audio (TTA) generation. Perform
all reasoning INTERNALLY and output ONLY valid JSON with the final scheduling results.
Never include explanations or chain-of-thought. Your JSON MUST be parsable and follow
the schema exactly.
OBJECTIVE
Given (1) a natural-language text prompt describing an audio scene with multiple events
and relations, and (2) a target total duration in seconds, decompose the scene into concise
sub-prompts (each corresponds to one independent audio event to be synthesized by a TTA
model), and schedule them on the global timeline with start times and durations.
OUTPUT (JSON ONLY)
{
"total_duration_sec": <float>,
// equals the requested total duration
"sub_prompts": [
{
"id": "E1",
// short unique id
"text": "<short English sub-prompt>",
// head + present participle; may include light modifiers
"start_sec": <float>,
// >= 0
"duration_sec": <float>
// > 0, and start_sec + duration_sec <= total_duration_sec
}
// ... typically <= items total
]
}
LANGUAGE FOR SUB-PROMPTS
• Use concise English in “head + present participle” style: e.g., “door bell ringing
audio”, “footsteps running audio”.
• Add light, meaningful modifiers when clearly implied by text: “as background”,
“approaching”, “departing”, “slight reverberation”, “time-stretched”, “amplified”,
“attenuated”, “balanced against X”, “blended with Y”.
• Avoid redundant words; keep each sub-prompt single-sentence and ď 18 words.
RELATIONS AND HOW TO REFLECT THEM (IMPLICITLY VIA SCHEDULING + WORDING)
• Sequencing: “then/after/next/first. . . then. . . ” Ñ schedule sequentially with a small
gap « 0.1s.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Simultaneity / Mix / Background Ñ allow overlaps; backgrounds can span large
portions of the timeline.
• Approaching / Departing Ñ keep in wording (“approaching”/“departing”). No
mandatory duration change.
• OR / XOR Ñ choose the most natural option; do not include the unchosen one.
• NOT / prohibit Ñ exclude that event entirely.
• IF...THEN...ELSE Ñ choose the most sensible branch; output only the chosen
branch.
• Count Ñ if an explicit number of items/events is requested, match it.
• Repetition Ñ instantiate repeated events (e.g., bell ringing three times) as multiple
sub-segments or one sustained segment if implied.
• Proximity / Closeness / Farness Ñ reflect via wording only (“distant thunder”,
“near crowd”). No strict timing rules.
DURATION AND SCHEDULING RULES
• Respect total duration: sum of all segments should match the requested duration
(˘0.25s); if off, adjust proportionally.
• Each segment duration sec MUST be integer.
• Choose reasonable segment durations:
– transient cues (e.g., bell, door knock, gunshot) Ñ 1–2s
– medium actions (e.g., footsteps, typing, sawing) Ñ 2–6s
– ambient backgrounds (e.g., rain, wind, crowd murmur) Ñ long spans (often
entire duration)
• start sec ě 0; end ď total duration.
• On conflicts, preserve explicit relations first; compress lightly but keep segments ě
0.5s.
• Keep the number of sub-prompts concise (typically ď 5).
FORMATTING RULES
• Output VALID JSON only. No comments, no trailing commas, no text outside
JSON.
• Floats may be given with 1–2 decimals.
• Ensure “start sec + duration sec ď total duration sec” for all
segments.
2. Segment Synthesis. Each sub-prompt is independently synthesized into audio by using Tan-
goFlux (Hung et al., 2026).
3. Stitching. All generated audio segments are linearly composited by respecting their designated
started time to generate the final audio.
.4
TTA MODEL BASELINES INFERENCE SETTING
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table I: AudioEventSet corpus detail. We list all 110 event classes, which are deriving from 7 main
categories and 23 sub-categories.
Main Category
Sub-Category
Names
Description
Animal
(22)
wild ground animal
lion roaring, wolf howling,
donkey braying, cricket chirping,
frog croaking, horse neighing
live in the wild
domestic animal
dog barking, cat meowing,
dog growling, cat spurring
live in domestic setting
livestock
pig oinking, sheep bleating,
cow mooing,
rooster crowing, duck quacking
domesticated livestock
wild animal
cuckoo calling, birds chorus,
seagull cawing, peacock rattling
blue jay whistling,
nightingale singing, fly buzzing
animals in the wild
Human
(21)
human voice
baby crying, laughing, shouting,
whistling, coughing, snoring,
sneezing, chewing, burping, farting
human use vocal tract
human speech
male speech, female speech,
child speech, group talk
speech audio
hands action
finger snapping, clapping
audio by action
group action
group clapping,
cheering, group talking
audio by a group
locomotion
running, footsteps
audio by movement
Machinery
(13)
alarm
siren, door bell, car horn,
bicycle bell, telephone ringing,
telephone dialing, boat horn
machinery alarming
mechanism
ratchet and pawl clicking,
camera shuttering,
printer printing, engine revving,
clock ticking, paper shredding
mechanism audio
Human-Obj
Interaction
(18)
tools
hammer nailing, wood sawing,
pen writing, wood chopping, rasping
human use tools
culinary
dish audio, silverware audio,
food frying, vegetable chopping
in kitchen setting
work
toilet flushing, pouring water,
keyboard typing, door slamming,
cupboard open or close,
drawer open or close, packing tape,
dentist drilling, door knocking
audio during work
Obj-Obj
Interaction
(15)
impact audio
key jingling, ball bouncing,
pen clicking, wind chime
impact effect
friction audio
car emergency braking
knife sharpening, sandpaper scraping,
plastic scratching, string rubbing
friction effect
dropping audio
coin dropping, glass clinking,
metal dropping
dropping effect
explosion
gunshot, firework, artillery fire
explosion effect
Music
(11)
music instrument
plucked string, piano keyboard,
bowed string, wind string, brass,
harmonica, accordion
musical instruments
singing
female singing, male singing,
child singing, group singing
singing audio
Nature
(10)
water
water bubbling, ocean wave,
water dripping, water flowing,
water boiling
water movement
weather
thunder, wind, rain
nature weather
nature change
wood cracking, rustling leaves
natural change
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table II: AudioRelSet corpus detail. We introduce 21 basic relations, and advanced 79 nested
combination relations, resulting in a total of 100 relations – 9 times larger than the relation corpus
proposed in RiTTA (He et al., 2025). AudioRelSet maximumly covers all potential relations that
audio events may exhibit in either the physical world or linguistic description. It is worth noting that
AudioRelSet is open-ended. By nesting existing relations, we can potentially construct massive new
relations.
Category
Relation Name
Explanation
Event Arity
Sample prompt
Temporality
(4)
precedence
before
binary
audio {A} followed by {B}
succession
after
binary
create audio {A} after {B}
simultaneity
same time
binary
{A} and {B} simultaneously
periodicity
cyclic
unary
create audio {A} periodically
Spatiality
(5)
closeness
spatial close
binary
{A} is closer than {B}
farness
spatial far
binary
{A} is farther than audio {B}
proximity
equal-dist
binary
{A} and {B} the same dist
approaching
moving close
unary
{A} is moving closer
departuring
moving away
unary
{A} is moving further away.
Count (1)
count
number
n-ary
3 audios: {A}, {B} and {C}
Perceptuality
(6)
balancing
level balance
binary
{A} dominates, {B} fades
blending
mix audios
binary
{A} and {B} are mixed
reverberation
reverberant
unary
generate audio {A} in canyon
time-stretching
speed manipulate
unary
stretch audio {A} in time scale
amplification
become louder
unary
amplify {A} to be louder
attenuation
less loudly
unary
attenuate {A} to be quieter
Composition-
ality
(5)
conjunction
logical AND
binary
create both {A} and {B}
disjunction
logical OR
binary
create {A} or {B}, or both
negation
logical NOT
unary
do not generate audio {A}
exclusive-or
logical XOR
binary
generate {A} or {B}, not both
implication
if-then-else
ternary
if {A}, then {B}, else just {C}
Nested
Combination
(79)
Temp + Spat (4)
Temp + Spat
binary
{A} before approaching {B}
Temp + Percep (8)
Temp + Percep
reverb. {A}, succeeded by {B}
Percep + Comp (12)
Percep + Comp
stretched {A} or {B}, not both
Spat + Comp (4)
Spat + Comp
approaching {A} or {B},
not both
Temp + Comp (6)
Temp + Comp
ternary
{A} first, then {B} or {C}
Percep + Comp (1)
Percep + Comp
mix {A} with {B}, or {C}
Comp + Comp (1)
Comp + Comp
{A} and {B}, or {A} and {C}
Spat + Comp (5)
Comp + Comp
{A} and {B}, or {A} and {C}
Spat + Comp
+ Percep (2)
Comp + Comp
{A} and {B}, or {A} and {C}
Temp + Comp (4)
Temp + Comp
quaternary
audio {A} or {B} first,
followed by {C} or {D}
Comp + Comp (7)
Comp + Comp
{A} or {B} first,
then {C} or {D}
Temp + Comp (3)
Temp + Comp
quinary
{A} before {B} first, then {C}
before {D} or {E}
Spat + Comp (9)
Spat + Comp
if {A} closer than {B}, then
{C} closer than {D}, else {E}
Comp + Comp (9)
Comp + Comp
if {A} and {B}, then {C}
and {D} else {E}
Count + Comp (4)
Count + Comp
if {A}, {B}, {C}, then {D},
else {E}
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Methods
Setting
AudioLDM (S-Full) (2023)
guidance scale=5, random seed=42, n candidates=3
AudioLDM (L-Full) (2023)
guidance scale=5, random seed=42, n candidates=3
AudioLDM 2 (L-Full) (2023)
guidance scale=3.5, random seed=45, n candidates=3
MakeAnAudio (2023)
ddim steps = 100, scale = 3.0
AudioGen (2023)
model name: audiogen-medium
Auffusion (2024)
num steps = 100, guidance=7.5, num samples=1
LAFMA (2024)
num steps = 200, guidance=3, num samples=1
Tango (2023)
num steps = 200, guidance=3, num samples=1
Tango 2 (2024)
num steps = 200, guidance=3, num samples=1
TangoFlux (2026)
num steps = 50, guidance=3, num samples=1
Table III: Detail setting for each TTA method.
17