--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LEARNING MASSIVELY MULTITASK
WORLD MODELS FOR CONTINUOUS CONTROL
Nicklas Hansen⋆, Hao Su⋆†, Xiaolong Wang⋆†
⋆University of California San Diego,
†Equal advising
{nihansen,haosu,xiw012}@ucsd.edu
ABSTRACT
General-purpose control demands agents that act across many tasks and embod-
iments, yet research on reinforcement learning (RL) for continuous control re-
mains dominated by single-task or offline regimes, reinforcing a view that online
RL does not scale. Inspired by the foundation model recipe (large-scale pretrain-
ing followed by light RL) we ask whether a single agent can be trained on hun-
dreds of tasks with online interaction. To accelerate research in this direction,
we introduce a new benchmark with 200 diverse tasks spanning many domains
and embodiments, each with language instructions, demonstrations, and option-
ally image observations. We then present Newt, a language-conditioned multitask
world model that is first pretrained on demonstrations to acquire task-aware rep-
resentations and action priors, and then jointly optimized with online interaction
across all tasks. Experiments show that Newt yields better multitask performance
and data-efficiency than a set of strong baselines, exhibits strong open-loop con-
trol, and enables rapid adaptation to unseen tasks. We release our environments,
demonstrations, code for training and evaluation, as well as 200+ checkpoints.
Webpage: https://www.nicklashansen.com/NewtWM
1
INTRODUCTION
0
20M
40M
60M
80M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Average score
200 tasks
BC
PPO
FastTD3
Single-task BC
Ours (no demos)
Ours
Figure 1. Massively multitask RL.
Average score when training a single
agent via online interaction on 200
tasks spanning 10 task domains.
Learning a generalist control policy that can perform a wide
variety of tasks is an ambitious goal shared by many re-
searchers, and significant progress has already been made
towards that goal (Jang et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022; Bro-
han et al., 2023; Open X-Embodiment Collaboration et al.,
2023; Black et al., 2024). However, the dominant approach
among current efforts is to train a large policy with super-
vised learning on an enormous dataset of near-expert trajec-
tories collected by e.g. human teleoperation.
This approach has two major drawbacks: (i) it greatly lim-
its the amount of data available for training, and (ii) per-
formance of the resulting policy is ultimately bounded by
the quality of demonstrations. For these reasons, the com-
munity is increasingly turning to reinforcement learning
(RL) for continuous improvement of large models. While
this new paradigm of large-scale pretraining followed by
light RL has led to impressive capabilities in game-playing
(Baker et al., 2022; Vasco et al., 2025) and reasoning (Ope-
nAI, 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025), the continuous
control community remains dominated by narrow training tasks (Tassa et al., 2018; Cobbe et al.,
2019; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2024; Joshi et al., 2025) or strictly
offline regimes (Lee et al., 2022; Hansen et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025), reinforcing a view that RL
from online interaction does not scale in this domain.
In this work, we challenge this assumption and ask the following question: can a single policy
be trained with online RL on hundreds of control tasks at once? To answer this question, we in-
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
DMControl
(21 tasks)
DMControl Ext.
(16 tasks)
Meta-World
(49 tasks)
ManiSkill3
(36 tasks)
MuJoCo
(6 tasks)
MiniArcade
(19 tasks)
Box2D
(8 tasks)
RoboDesk
(6 tasks)
OGBench
(12 tasks)
Atari
(27 tasks)
Figure 2. Tasks. Our proposed benchmark,
MMBench, consists of 200 distinct tasks across 10
task domains, including 41 new tasks. See Appendix C for a detailed overview of our task set.
troduce
MMBench: the first benchmark for massively multitask RL. MMBench comprises of
200 diverse tasks spanning multiple domains and embodiments, each with language instructions,
demonstrations, and optionally image observations, enabling research on both multitask pretraining,
offline-to-online RL, and RL from scratch.
We then present
Newt, a language-conditioned multitask world model based on TD-MPC2
(Hansen et al., 2024), which we first pretrain on demonstrations to acquire task-aware representa-
tions and action priors, and then jointly optimize with online interaction across all tasks. To extend
TD-MPC2 to the massively multitask online setting, we propose a series of algorithmic improve-
ments including a refined architecture, model-based pretraining on the available demonstrations,
additional action supervision in RL policy updates, and a drastically accelerated training pipeline.
We validate our method on our proposed benchmark, and demonstrate that effective policy learning
across hundreds of tasks is feasible with online RL and in fact can lead to strong multitask policies.
Our experiments demonstrate that Newt (1) outperforms a set of strong baselines when training from
state observations, (2) can be rapidly adapted to unseen tasks and embodiments by finetuning with
online RL, (3) is capable of open-loop control over surprisingly long time horizons, and (4) benefits
from access to high-resolution image observations. In support of open-source science, we release
200+ model checkpoints, 4000+ task demonstrations, code for training and evaluation of Newt
agents, as well as all 220 MMBench tasks (including 20 test tasks) considered in this work.
In the following, we first introduce our benchmark MMBench, and then present our Newt world
model. Readers can refer to Appendix A for a comprehensive discussion of related work on bench-
marks, training infrastructure, and scaling of RL and control policies more broadly. We also provide
recommendations for future work in Appendix B.
2
BENCHMARK FOR MASSIVELY MULTITASK REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
To study the feasibility of Massively Multitask RL, we introduce
MMBench: the first bench-
mark of its kind. MMBench contains a total of 200 unique continuous control tasks for training
of massively multitask RL policies. The task suite consists of 159 existing tasks proposed in pre-
vious work, 22 new tasks and task variants for these existing domains, as well as 19 entirely new
arcade-style tasks that we dub MiniArcade. The overarching goal of MMBench is to provide a com-
mon framework and infrastructure for research and prototyping of massively multitask RL. Figure 2
provides an overview of the 10 domains included in MMBench, Figure 3 shows tasks included in
MiniArcade, and Appendix C provides a detailed description of each task domain. In the following,
we discuss key features of our benchmark, as well as our efforts in making MMBench accessible to
the broader research community.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 3. MiniArcade. We release a new task suite, dubbed MiniArcade, that consists of 22 tasks
spanning 14 unique arcade-style environments (depicted). All tasks support both low-dimensional
state representations and RGB observations, and have well-defined reward functions for RL.
Ant Ball (OGBench)
Embodiment: Ant (quadruped) with 8 controllable joints (4 legs).
Instruction: Push the soccer ball to the goal location.
Rocket Collect (MiniArcade)
Embodiment: 2D space rocket with 2 controllable actions: main engine and side thruster.
Instruction: Collect coins while avoiding asteroids.
Figure 4. Sample language instructions. All instructions in MMBench provide a description of
embodiment and action space followed by a task description. Refer to Appendix D for more samples.
2.1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Online reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a policy (agent) from interaction with an (in our
case: multitask) environment. This interaction is commonly modeled as an infinite-horizon Par-
tially Observable Markov Decision Process (Bellman, 1957; Kaelbling et al., 1998) formalized
as a tuple (S, A, T , R, γ). Here, environment dynamics T : S × A 7→S are governed by gener-
ally unobservable states s ∈S approximated as s .= (sstate, simg, slang) where sstate, simg, slang are
low-dimensional state inputs, image observations, and language instructions, respectively, a ∈A
are actions, R: S × A 7→R is a reward function that produces task-specific rewards r, and γ
is a task-specific discount factor. Our overarching goal is to learn a single policy π s.t. return
Eπ [P∞
t=0 γtrt] , rt = R(st, π(st)) is maximized in expectation across all time steps and tasks, i.e.,
a massively multitask policy trained to perform hundreds of tasks simultaneously via online RL.
2.2
ENVIRONMENTS
DMControl
Meta-World
Maniskill
MuJoCo
RoboDesk
OGBench
MiniArcade
Drawer Open
Door Open
Pick Cube
Pick Banana
Open Drawer
Open Slide
Hopper Hop
Hopper
Cheetah Run
Half-cheetah
Hopper Hop
Quadruped Run
Ant
Ant Ball
Ant Run
Lunar Lander
Landing
Pong
Air Hockey
Pointmass
Point Maze
Box2D
Figure 5. Language embeddings. First
2 principal components of CLIP-ViT/B
embeddings shown for a subset of tasks.
Observations, actions, and rewards. Our task suite
comprises of diverse continuous control tasks span-
ning locomotion, tabletop manipulation, navigation,
arcade games, classic control problems, and more.
Tasks vary greatly in observation and action space di-
mensionality, task horizon, and reward specification.
All tasks support three observation modes: (1) low-
dimensional states, (2) 224 × 224 RGB images, or (3)
both. To unify state observations and actions across
tasks and domains, we provide a mask such that in-
valid dimensions can be taken into account during pol-
icy learning and inference. Unification of visual ob-
servations is done on a per-domain basis, with some
domains readily supporting rendering at 224 × 224,
while others require resizing (Box2D) or zero-padding
(Atari). Refer to Appendix C for a table detailing the
observations, actions, rewards, and episode lengths in
each task domain.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Embodiment: Quadruped (ant) with 12 controllable joints (4 legs).
Instruction: Run as fast as possible using all 4 legs.
Task description
Actions
Valid
Masked
...
Environments
200 tasks
RGB obs
DINOv2
State obs
CLIP
Rewards
Newt
World Model
Newt Architecture
t=0
t=1
...
t=H
...
0.1
0.4
0.7
t=0
t=1
t=H
enc
...
...
r
a
q
1
1
1
r
a
q
H
H
H
Self-predictive world model
TD-MPC2
enc
enc
stop-grad
r
a
q
0
0
0
Figure 6. Method. Our agent (
) iteratively collects data via multitask environment (
) interac-
tion, and optimizes its world model on the collected data. The world model takes a state vector,
language instruction, and optionally RGB observations as input, and outputs actions via planning.
Language instructions. While some tasks can be differentiated solely based on observations, this is
not universally true. For example, the manipulation tasks in RoboDesk share a common observation
space (pose and velocity of robot and objects), and thus it is not clear from observations alone which
object is to be manipulated. A simple solution would be to provide agents with a one-hot encoding
of task indices, but this greatly limits the potential for transfer to new tasks since it provides no
mechanism for representing unseen tasks. Instead, we choose to provide language instructions for
every task in MMBench. Two sample language instructions are shown in Figure 4, with additional
samples available in Appendix D. To verify that language instructions adequately differentiate tasks
and embodiments, we encode all language instructions from MMBench with CLIP-ViT/B, and
visualize their first two principal components in Figure 5.
2.3
ACCESSIBILITY
Training agents with online RL on a large number of tasks is challenging from a learning perspective
and may be prohibitively expensive for researchers and practitioners with limited computational
resources. To make MMBench accessible to the broader RL community, we have devoted significant
time and effort to reduce computational costs.
Demonstrations. Exploration has historically been a key challenge in online RL, and a large body
of literature is dedicated to exploration strategies (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2003; Bellemare et al.,
2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Sekar et al., 2020; Ecoffet et al., 2021; Ladosz et al., 2022). However, as
problem scope and task complexity grows, learning an agent from scratch (“tabula rasa”) via RL is
becoming infeasible. Demonstrations serve as a strong behavior prior that dramatically reduces the
exploration burden and variance of online RL, creating a practical path for researchers with limited
compute to still contribute to the field. To this end, we provide 10-40 demonstrations for each task
in MMBench, collected by single-task TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) agents trained from low-
dimensional state observations. While we do not directly leverage the trained single-task agents in
this work (beyond collecting demonstrations), we make all 200 model checkpoints available for use
by other researchers, and are excited to see what the community will use them for.
Asynchronous environments. Our benchmark consists of hundreds of environments in multiple
robotics simulators, 2D game engines, and emulators, which complicates parallelization and overall
software integration. To aid adoption, we provide a ready-to-use docker image and fast, easy-to-
use environment wrappers that enable asynchronous environment stepping and rendering, batched
frame-stacking and image encoding using large pretrained backbones, cached language embeddings,
easy handling of diverse observation and action spaces, as well as auto-resetting whenever a task
completes. These measures drastically reduce wall-time and allow users to get started immediately.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3
NEWT: A MULTITASK WORLD MODEL FOR CONTINUOUS CONTROL
To learn RL agents effectively in a massively multitask setting like ours, the algorithm of choice
needs to satisfy the following criteria: it needs to (i) scale with increasing model and data size,
(ii) be robust to various observation and action spaces, reward functions, and task horizons, (iii)
be able to adequately differentiate tasks, and (iv) train in a reasonable time frame. We choose to
base our agent, Newt, on model-based RL algorithm TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2022; 2024) as it
satisfies the first two criteria. Concretely, TD-MPC2 performs trajectory optimization (planning)
in the latent space of a learned self-predictive (decoder-free) world model, and it has demonstrated
robust learning across a variety of single-task (online RL) and multi-task (offline RL) environments.
We extend TD-MPC2 to the massively multitask online RL setting, and describe our algorithmic
improvements in the following. Figure 6 summarizes our approach.
3.1
LEARNING A MASSIVELY MULTITASK WORLD MODEL
TD-MPC2 learns its world model with a combination of joint-embedding prediction (self-predictive
dynamics modeling), reward prediction, and TD-learning (Sutton, 1998); this is in contrast to gen-
erative world models that are typically trained to decode raw future observations (e.g. RGB images)
using an auxiliary decoder network. A key benefit of self-predictive world models is, in addition to
being computationally cheap due to not having a decoder, that they are trained to be control-centric:
accurately predicting outcome (return) conditioned on a sequence of actions. Our proposed world
model extends the TD-MPC2 architecture to support language instructions and optionally RGB ob-
servations in addition to low-dimensional state observations. Specifically, our world model consists
of the following components:
Language encoder
g = CLIPtext(slang)
▷Encodes natural language instruction
Image encoder
x = DINOv2(simg)
▷Encodes RGB image observation (optional)
State encoder
z = h(sstate, x, g)
▷Computes latent state representation
Latent dynamics
z′ = d(z, a, g)
▷Predicts latent forward dynamics
Reward
ˆr = R(z, a, g)
▷Predicts reward r of a transition
Terminal value
ˆq = Q(z, a, g)
▷Predicts discounted sum of rewards (return)
Policy prior
ˆa = p(z, g)
▷Predicts optimal action a∗
(1)
where s = {slang, simg, sstate} are language, image, and state observations, respectively, a are actions.
In practice, we use (frozen) pretrained backbones for language and image inputs which allows us to
cache embeddings, and we choose to implement all other components as MLPs. Components that
take multiple arguments as input fuse their inputs via concatenation before feeding them into the
first dense layer, i.e., we let h(sstate, x, g) .= h([sstate, x, g]) where [·] denotes concatenation.
Following TD-MPC2, we jointly optimize h, d, R, Q by gradient descent on the objective
L (θ) .= E
τ∼B


H
X
t=0
λt


∥z′
t −sg(h(s′
statet, x′
t, g))∥2
2
|
{z
}
Self-prediction
+ ℓCE(ˆrt, rt)
|
{z
}
Rewards
+ ℓCE(ˆqt, qt)
|
{z
}
Values




,
(2)
where τ = (s, a, r, s′)0:H is a subsequence sampled from a replay buffer B, λ ∈(0, 1] is a constant
coefficient which weighs temporally distant samples exponentially less, sg is a stop−grad operator
that helps mitigate representation collapse (Grill et al., 2020), ℓCE is the cross-entropy loss, and
predictions (z′
t, ˆrt, ˆqt) are as defined in Equation 1. Regressing rewards and values using a MSE
loss is challenging in a multitask setting as reward distributions may be drastically different between
tasks and task domains. Therefore, we opt for a discrete regression objective (the cross-entropy
loss) and model values in a log-transformed space such that we are able to model a wide range of
values with a single prediction head (Bellemare et al., 2017; Kumar et al., 2023; Hafner et al., 2023;
Hansen et al., 2024; Farebrother et al., 2024). We use qt = rt + γQtgt(z′
t, p(z′
t), g) as our one-
step TD-target (Sutton, 1998), and let Qtgt be an exponential moving average (EMA) of the online
Q network (Lillicrap et al., 2016). In practice, we optimize a small ensemble of Q-networks and
define the target Q-value as the minimum of a random subset of Qtgt estimates (Chen et al., 2021).
We choose to use per-task discount factors (γ) since episode lengths vary drastically between tasks;
we use the domain-default discount factor when one is available and otherwise estimate it using a
heuristic described in Appendix H.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The policy prior p is formulated as a stochastic maximum entropy policy (Ziebart et al., 2008)
that learns to maximize Q-values as estimated by the Q-network defined above. However, we find
that naive application of this policy objective to our problem setting leads to subpar performance
in tasks where Q-values are difficult to estimate. Instead, we choose to leverage a small set of
demonstrations (more on this in Section E) and add an additional behavior cloning loss to the policy
prior of TD-MPC2. This serves two purposes: (i) directly leveraging expert demonstrations as action
supervision, and (ii) explicitly distilling actions selected via planning into the less expressive policy
prior. Concretely, we define the policy objective as
Lp(θ) .= E
τ∼B


H
X
t=0
λt

∥p(zt, g) −at∥2
2
|
{z
}
Model-based BC
−Q(zt, p(zt, g), g)
|
{z
}
Q-value
−H(p(·|zt, g))
|
{z
}
Entropy



,
(3)
where zt+1 = d(zt, at, g), z0 = h(sstate0, x0, g) is the latent rollout of τ. During environment
interaction, TD-MPC2 selects actions by planning with the learned world model, with the planning
procedure warm-started by the policy prior p. Refer to Appendix G for details on our planning
algorithm. In the following, we describe other ways in which we leverage demonstrations.
3.2
LEVERAGING DEMONSTRATIONS FOR WORLD MODEL LEARNING
To overcome the difficulty of exploration in massively multitask online RL, we choose to leverage
a small number of demonstrations for each task. Although one could naively add demonstrations to
the replay buffer at the start of training and indeed benefit from the model-based BC term introduced
in Equation 3, we would like to utilize demonstrations to their full extent. Concretely, we propose
to use demonstrations in four distinct ways:
(1) Model-based pretraining. Prior to any online interaction, we first pretrain all learnable compo-
nents from Equation 1 on the provided demonstrations. Specifically, we assume that demonstrations
consist of (s, a, r) tuples and jointly optimize all components by minimizing L(θ) + Lp(θ), but
with the Q-value term in Equation 3 temporarily disabled such that we can fully leverage the strong
action supervision from the demonstrations. This is in contrast to prior work (Zhan et al., 2020;
Hansen et al., 2023a) that pretrains only encoder and/or policy.
(2) Constrained planning. When transitioning from pretraining to online RL, we empirically ob-
serve that (at the start of RL) planning with the world model yields a weaker behavior policy than
directly using the pretrained policy due to a (comparably) inaccurate value function. To maximally
retain performance when switching to planning, we initially bias the planner towards the pretrained
policy and linearly anneal this bias to zero during the first 12% of training. See Appendix G for
details.
(3) Oversampling of demonstrations. We maintain separate replay buffers for demonstrations
and online interactions, and sample subsequences at equal proportions (50% from each) during
agent updates (Feng et al., 2023; Ball et al., 2023). This means that demonstrations are (artificially)
overrepresented in the training data, and ensures that the demonstration data remains available to the
agent throughout training regardless of the capacity of the online interaction buffer.
(4) Action supervision in RL policy updates. As discussed in Section 3.1, adding a (model-based)
BC loss term in the policy objective of Equation 3 provides direct action supervision and helps
regularize the RL-based policy objective when Q-value estimation is inaccurate (Lin et al., 2025).
In summary, our Newt agent is a model-based RL method for language- and optionally image-
conditioned massively multitask continuous control. It aims to fully leverage available demonstra-
tions as well as online interaction data, resulting in a data-efficient yet computationally inexpensive
method. In addition to the algorithmic improvements discussed in this section, we also drasti-
cally accelerate training speed by distributing both model updates, environment interactions, and
replay buffers across multiple processes and GPUs, compiling training and inference code with
torch.compile (Bou et al., 2023), and other implementation details described in Appendix H.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl Ext.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Meta-World
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ManiSkill
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
MuJoCo
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
Box2D
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
RoboDesk
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
OGBench
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
MiniArcade
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Atari
BC
Single-task BC
PPO
FastTD3
TD-MPC2
Ours
Figure 7. Per-domain performance. Average score of a single state-based agent on MMBench (10
task domains; 200 tasks). See Appendix J for more baselines, and Appendix K for per-task curves.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate
Newt on our proposed benchmark
MMBench which consists of 200 tasks across
10 task domains: DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018), DMControl Extended, Meta-World (Yu et al.,
2019), ManiSkill3 (Tao et al., 2025), MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), MiniArcade (a contribution of
this work), Box2D (Brockman et al., 2016), RoboDesk (Kannan et al., 2021), OGBench (Park et al.,
2025), and Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013; Farebrother & Castro, 2024). See Figure 2 for a visual
overview of task domains, and refer to Appendix C for a detailed description of each task domain.
Although our method can readily be applied to visual RL, experiments in this section use state obser-
vations unless we explicitly state otherwise. In support of open-source science, we publicly release
200+ model checkpoints, 4000+ task demonstrations, code for training and evaluation of Newt
agents, as well as all 220 MMBench tasks considered in this work. We seek to answer:
(Q1) Performance. Can a single agent be trained on hundreds of unique tasks with online RL? How
does our model-based approach (Newt) compare to a set of strong baselines?
(Q2) Learning from demonstration. Do demonstrations alleviate the difficulty of exploration in a
massively multitask setting? How do we leverage demonstrations effectively for model-based RL?
(Q3) Model capabilities. What are the downstream capabilities of a massively multitask world
model? Can we leverage our trained model for zero-shot or few-shot transfer to unseen tasks/em-
bodiments? Can we perform open-loop control?
(Q4) Analysis & ablations. What makes a good multitask world model? What role does language
and vision play? What are the current capabilities and limitations of Newt?
Baselines. Our baselines represent the state-of-the-art in data-efficient RL, learning from demon-
strations, and RL with large amounts of parallel environments. Specifically, our baselines include:
• Behavior cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1988; Atkeson & Schaal, 1997) on demonstrations. We com-
pare against a language-conditioned multitask BC policy, as well as • 200 single-task BC policies.
• Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is an on-policy actor–critic method
that maximizes a clipped surrogate objective, and it has gained popularity in part due to its fast
wall-time training when combined with massive parallel simulation. We base our experiments on
the cleanRL (Huang et al., 2022b) implementation, and extend it to support language-conditioning
and per-task discount factors. We also tune hyperparameters; see Appendix J for results before/after.
• FastTD3 (Seo et al., 2025), a modern implementation of TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) designed for
RL with parallel environments. We extend FastTD3 to support language-conditioning and per-task
discount factors, and find that n-step returns of 8 are critical in our challenging multitask setting.
• TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2022; 2024) trained with multitask online RL. This baseline can be con-
sidered a more naive implementation of Newt without language-conditioning, pretraining, demon-
strations, nor the BC loss term introduced in Equation 3. We match the parameter count of Newt.
• 200 single-task TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2022; 2024) agents trained on individual tasks for 5M
environment steps (1B total steps). We collect demonstrations for BC and Newt using these agents.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.1
0.3
0.5
Model size
200 tasks
2M
20M
5M
80M
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Batch size
200 tasks
128
512
256
1024
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Language instructions
200 tasks
None
CLIP
Task ID
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Demonstrations
200 tasks
÷demos
÷pretrain
÷BC
All
Figure 8. Ablations of all key design choices. Our default formulation of Newt is shown in bold.
• Model-based pretraining of our Newt world model on the same demonstrations as for BC. During
pretraining, we optimize the model as described in Section 3.2.
See Appendix F for more information on baselines, including implementation and hyperparameters.
Implementation details. Language is encoded using CLIP-ViT/B (Radford et al., 2021) and
images using DINOv2/B (Oquab et al., 2023), which results in embeddings of dimensions 512 and
768, respectively. State observations are 128-dim vectors, actions are 16-dim vectors, and our Newt
agents have 20M learnable parameters unless stated otherwise. See Appendix H for more details.
4.1
RESULTS
Benchmarking algorithms. We evaluate the performance of our method, Newt, and baselines on
our proposed MMBench task suite. Methods are trained for 100M environment steps (in total across
all tasks) using low-dimensional state observations. Our main result is shown in Figure 1, and per-
domain scores are shown in Figure 14. These results indicate that Newt is more data-efficient and
achieves a higher overall performance than PPO, FastTD3, and TD-MPC2, which we attribute in
part to its significantly better performance in DMControl, DMControl Ext., ManiSkill, and MiniAr-
cade. However, we also observe subpar performance across all RL methods in the MuJoCo, Box2D,
and Atari domains, with the performance of Newt often being similar to that of the simpler BC base-
line. We conjecture that this may be due to the relative uniqueness of tasks in these domains; for
example, many Atari games have little in common beyond their action space. While we observe that
the addition of demonstrations in many cases leads to better asymptotic performance as it alleviates
the difficulty of exploration, we recognize that there is still room for improvement; developing meth-
ods that yield more consistent improvement across tasks is thus an exciting future research direction.
Please refer to Appendix J and Appendix K for additional experiments and baseline comparisons.
Table 1. Language sometimes inhibits zero-
shot generalization. Success rate with seen
and unseen instructions in 10 unseen manip-
ulation tasks. 100 trials per task.
Instruction
Success (%)
(Default)
Push <unseen>
0.3
Push <cube>
21.0
(Default)
Pick <unseen>
10.5
Pick <cube>
0
Analysis & ablations.
We ablate all key design
choices, including model and batch size, use of lan-
guage instructions, as well as all the different ways
in which we can leverage demonstrations. Ablations
are conducted with 20M parameter agents on the full
200-task set. Our main ablations are shown in Fig-
ure 8; additional experiments and per-domain results
can be found in Appendix J. We make the following
observations:
(1) Scaling model and batch size is beneficial when
the number of training tasks increases. In contrast
to previous work that shows only marginal improve-
ments from model scaling in a single-task RL setting (Hansen et al., 2024), we see a clear benefit
in scaling model and batch size in a multitask setting, up to a point; see Appendix H for details on
scaling. We conjecture that there exists a compute-optimal (model, batch) size for any given number
of tasks in which learning is stable, and that further scaling of training tasks will require proportion-
ally larger models and batches than presently.
(2) Language helps differentiate tasks. We find that conditioning the agent on language instructions
provides clear performance benefits (0.371 →0.438 normalized score), with the greatest improve-
ment in domains where tasks cannot be differentiated by observations alone (e.g. RoboDesk); see
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Walker Walk (DMControl)
t = 0
t = 16
t = 32
t = 48
Lunarlander Takeoff (Box2D)
t = 0
t = 16
t = 32
t = 48
Point Maze (OGBench)
t = 0
t = 8
t = 16
t = 24
Pick Screwdriver (ManiSkill)
t = 0
t = 8
t = 16
t = 24
Figure 10. Open-loop control. Executing open-loop plans without any environment feedback.
These results indicate that our world model learns meaningful representations of the environment.
Appendix J for a detailed performance comparison of Newt with and without access to language
instructions. Additionally, as shown in Appendix L, this difference in downstream performance also
translates to a lower training loss for the language-conditioned agent. In fact, we find language con-
ditioning to match the performance of task indices (as used in TD-MPC2) on training tasks while
also providing a mechanism for generalization to unseen tasks.
(3) Demonstrations improve performance in hard exploration tasks. We find that any individual
way of using demonstrations (pretraining, oversampling, model-based BC loss) is helpful, but that
using them all in conjunction yields the best data-efficiency and asymptotic performance.
Few-shot finetuning
(20 unseen tasks/embodiments)
0
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
Environment steps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized score
From scratch
Finetuned
Figure 9. Few-shot finetuning. Aver-
age score when transferring our agent
to new tasks/embodiments. 5 seeds.
Task transfer. To investigate whether our multitask agent
transfers to unseen tasks/embodiments, we develop a held-
out task set that spans multiple task domains and finetune
our agent to each task individually using online RL and no
demonstrations. Transfer tasks and aggregate finetuning re-
sults are shown in Figure 9. We observe that the pretrained
Newt agent achieves a zero-shot score of 0.192 compared
to 0.013 when trained from scratch, and reaches an average
score of 0.868 at 100k environment steps vs. just 0.480 for
the baseline. These results demonstrate non-trivial transfer-
ability, and we expect transfer results to get better as more
and more training data becomes available. As shown in Ta-
ble 1, we find that unseen language instructions can greatly
inhibit zero-shot generalization of our agent, depending on
the task. Replacing the noun describing the object to be ma-
nipulated (unseen instruction) with cube (inaccurate but
seen instruction) improves zero-shot success rate by 20.7%
across 6 pushing tasks, whereas we see the reverse trend
for pick-and-place tasks. To best reflect the true capabili-
ties of our agent, we use unseen instructions in all transfer
experiments.
Open-loop control. Model-based approaches are uniquely
positioned to perform open-loop control (planning and ex-
ecuting actions without environment feedback). To better understand the current capabilities of
Newt, we compare its open-loop planning performance relative to the default closed-loop planning.
We evaluate on 8 diverse tasks and with planning horizons of up to 48 time steps – 16× longer
than its training horizon of 3. Qualitative results are shown in Figure 10, and the full quantitative
results are provided in Appendix I. We find that Newt can plan over long time horizons without
being explicitly trained to do so, with performance closely matching closed-loop control in most
tasks. Common failure modes include drifting dynamics (Walker Walk, DMControl), failing to de-
celerate after reaching the target (Lunarlander Takeoff, Box2D), or the inability to predict stochastic
elements (Assault, Atari). Refer to Appendix I for more open-loop results.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 2. Visual RL. Agent performance after
finetuning with visual inputs for 30M steps.
Domain
Score
Gain
State
All
0.438
−
+RGB
All
0.442
+0.004
↰
RoboDesk
0.500
+0.125
↰
Meta-World
0.572
+0.069
↰
MiniArcade
0.437
−0.004
↰
DMControl
0.471
−0.029
Table 3. Training cost. Expected wall-time
when training on 200 tasks for 100M envi-
ronment steps in total (20M params). Re-
ported for different hardware configurations.
Observation
Hardware
Days
State
1× RTX 3090
11.2
State
2× RTX 3090
7.3
State
2× RTX 5090
4.6
State+RGB
2× RTX PRO 6000
4.7
Visual observations.
The majority of our exper-
iments are conducted with low-dimensional states
due to (i) added computational costs of visual RL,
and (ii) lack of available baselines for massively
multitask visual RL. However, we hypothesize that
some task domains stand to benefit more from vi-
sion than others.
To test this hypothesis, we add
224×224 RGB inputs to our state-based agent as de-
scribed in Equation 1 and finetune the entire model
for 30M environment steps. We report average score
across all domains as well as for a select few do-
mains where the score change is noteworthy. We ob-
serve only a marginal overall improvement (+0.004)
with visual observations, but find that performance
improves significantly for manipulation (RoboDesk
and Meta-World) and decreases in domains such as
DMControl where learning from vision is known to
be more challenging than from state (Hafner et al.,
2019; Srinivas et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2020).
Training cost. Table 3 shows the expected wall-time
when training on 200 tasks from MMbench, for var-
ious hardware configurations and observation modes
(state and state+RGB with rendering at 224 × 224). Machines are equipped with an AMD EPYC
9354 CPU and ≥128 GB of RAM. The demonstration dataset requires 32 GB of disk space.
5
CONCLUSION
We present MMBench, a benchmark for massively multitask RL, as well as Newt, a language-
conditioned multitask world model trained with online RL. We demonstrate that online RL on hun-
dreds of tasks simultaneously is feasible, and that it can lead to world models with surprisingly
strong generalization and open-loop control capabilities. While we recognize that some challenges
remain (rate of improvement may differ substantially between tasks and domains, generalization is
currently inhibited by poor language understanding, as well as the significant hardware requirements
for fast visual RL), we remain very optimistic about the future of massively multitask RL training.
To encourage further research in this area, we provide a comprehensive discussion of related
work in Appendix A as well as recommendations for future work in Appendix B.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the following people for helpful discussions and feedback on paper drafts, in al-
phabetical order: Adrian Remonda, Arth Shukla, Bo Ai, Hansen Lillemark, Jiajun Xi, Lars Paulsen,
Stone Tao, and Yutao Xie. A special thanks is also extended to the open-source RL community,
without whom this project would not have been possible; particularly the original developers of Mu-
JoCo, DMControl, Meta-World, ManiSkill3, RoboDesk, OGBench, Arcade Learning Environment,
Gym and Gymnasium, TorchRL (Vincent Moens), as well as their numerous individual contributors.
This project was supported, in part, by NSF CAREER Award IIS-2240014 and NSF CCF-2112665
(TILOS), as well as gifts from Amazon, Meta, and Qualcomm.
STATEMENTS
A statement on reproducibility. Reproducibility is important to us. We release 200+ model check-
points, 4000+ task demonstrations, code for training and evaluation of Newt agents, as well as all
220 MMBench tasks (200 training tasks and 20 test tasks) considered in this work; all of our arti-
facts are made publicly available at https://www.nicklashansen.com/NewtWM. We also
provide extensive implementation details and empirical results in the appendices. Most notably, Ap-
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
pendix C provides an overview of task domains, Appendix E provides details on demonstrations,
Appendix F and Appendix H provide implementation details for baselines and Newt, respectively,
and Appendix K provides learning curves for all 200 tasks.
A statement on ethics. We propose a benchmark, MMBench, that is comprised of both entirely
new tasks, tasks that are derivative work based on existing task domains, and existing tasks that are
used as is. All task domains and baselines for which we rely on third-party code are open-source
and have permissible licenses. For example, DMControl is licensed under an Apache 2.0 License,
OGBench is licensed under an MIT License, and Arcade Learning Environment (ALE; also known
as Atari) is licensed under a GNU General Public License v2.0. Any derivative work of existing
task domains is licensed under their respective licenses; code contributed as part of our work (e.g.,
MiniArcade and Newt) is licensed under an MIT License.
REFERENCES
Christopher G. Atkeson and Stefan Schaal. Robot learning from demonstration. In ICML, 1997.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24639–24654,
2022.
Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-
ing with offline data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1577–1594. PMLR,
2023.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
jun 2013.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg,
I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29,
2016.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and R´emi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
Richard Bellman. A markovian decision process. Indiana Univ. Math. J., 6:679–684, 1957. ISSN
0022-2518.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo
Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. pi0: A vision-language-action flow
model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
Albert Bou, Matteo Bettini, Sebastian Dittert, Vikash Kumar, Shagun Sodhani, Xiaomeng Yang,
Gianni De Fabritiis, and Vincent Moens. Torchrl: A data-driven decision-making library for
pytorch, 2023.
Ronen I. Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-max - a general polynomial time algorithm for near-
optimal reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:213–231, March 2003. ISSN 1532-4435.
doi: 10.1162/153244303765208377.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning:
Learning fast without a model. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Xuxin Cheng, Kexin Shi, Ananye Agarwal, and Deepak Pathak.
Extreme parkour with legged
robots. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11443–
11450. IEEE, 2024.
Jack Clark and Dario Amodei. Faulty reward functions in the wild. OpenAI Blog, 2016.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural genera-
tion to benchmark reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588, 2019.
Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly C. Stadie, Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever,
P. Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. ArXiv, abs/1703.07326, 2017.
DYNA Robotics. Dynamism v1 (dyna-1) model: A breakthrough in performance and production-
ready embodied ai. https://www.dyna.co/research, June 2025.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
explore. Nature, 590(7847):580–586, 2021.
Lasse Espeholt, Rapha¨el Marinier, Piotr Stanczyk, Ke Wang, and Marcin Michalski. Seed rl: Scal-
able and efficient deep-rl with accelerated central inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06591,
2019.
Jesse Farebrother and Pablo Samuel Castro. Cale: Continuous arcade learning environment. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:134927–134946, 2024.
Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taiga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex Ir-
pan, Sergey Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agarwal.
Stop regressing: Training value functions via classification for scalable deep RL. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Yunhai Feng, Nicklas Hansen, Ziyan Xiong, Chandramouli Rajagopalan, and Xiaolong Wang. Fine-
tuning offline world models in the real world. Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altch’e, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo ´Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, R´emi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent:
A new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2020.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 2555–2565, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Nicklas Hansen and Xiaolong Wang. Generalization in reinforcement learning by soft data augmen-
tation. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2021.
Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
control. In ICML, 2022.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Nicklas Hansen, Yixin Lin, Hao Su, Xiaolong Wang, Vikash Kumar, and Aravind Rajeswaran.
Modem: Accelerating visual model-based reinforcement learning with demonstrations. 2023a.
Nicklas Hansen, Zhecheng Yuan, Yanjie Ze, Tongzhou Mu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Hao Su, Huazhe
Xu, and Xiaolong Wang. On pre-training for visuo-motor control: Revisiting a learning-from-
scratch baseline. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023b.
Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for contin-
uous control, 2024.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Antonin Raffin, Anssi Kanervisto, and
Weixun Wang.
The 37 implementation details of proximal policy optimization.
In
ICLR Blog Track, 2022a. URL https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/
25/ppo-implementation-details/.
https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/25/ppo-
implementation-details/.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty, Kinal
Mehta, and Jo˜ao G.M. Ara´ujo. Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of deep rein-
forcement learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(274):1–18, 2022b.
Marcel Hussing, Claas A. Voelcker, Igor Gilitschenski, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Eric Eaton.
Dissecting deep rl with high update ratios: Combatting value overestimation and divergence.
Reinforcement Learning Conference, August 2024.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In CoRL,
2021.
Viraj Joshi, Zifan Xu, Bo Liu, Peter Stone, and Amy Zhang. Benchmarking massively parallelized
multi-task reinforcement learning for robotics tasks.
In Reinforcement Learning Conference,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=z0MM0y20I2.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 1998.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski,
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic re-
inforcement learning at scale. ArXiv, abs/2104.08212, 2021.
Harini Kannan, Danijar Hafner, Chelsea Finn, and Dumitru Erhan. Robodesk: A multi-task rein-
forcement learning benchmark. https://github.com/google-research/robodesk,
2021.
Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth
Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis,
Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert, Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree
Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abraham Lee, Young-
woon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilija Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin
Black, Cheng Chi, Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pan-
nag R Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson, Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe,
Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher Agia, Rohan Baijal,
Mateo Guaman Castro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul
Foster, Jensen Gao, Vitor Guizilini, David Antonio Herrera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng
Hu, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Donovon Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Kevin Lin, Roy
Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton, Tony Nguyen, Abigail
O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang,
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yilin Wu, Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth,
Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Joseph J
Lim, Jitendra Malik, Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran
Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. 2024.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rockt¨aschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
2023.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D Environment
for Visual AI. arXiv, 2017.
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
deep reinforcement learning from pixels. International Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Xinyang Geng, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Offline q-
learning on diverse multi-task data both scales and generalizes.
International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2023.
Pawel Ladosz, Lilian Weng, Minwoo Kim, and Hyondong Oh. Exploration in deep reinforcement
learning: A survey. Information Fusion, 85:1–22, 2022.
Samuel Lavoie, Christos Tsirigotis, Max Schwarzer, Ankit Vani, Michael Noukhovitch, Kenji
Kawaguchi, and Aaron Courville. Simplicial embeddings in self-supervised learning and down-
stream classification.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=RWtGreRpovS.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Sergio Guadar-
rama, Ian Fischer, Winnie Xu, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision trans-
formers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27921–27936, 2022.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Mart´ın-
Mart´ın, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Wensi Ai, Benjamin Martinez, Hang Yin, Michael Lin-
gelbach, Minjune Hwang, Ayano Hiranaka, Sujay Garlanka, Arman Aydin, Sharon Lee, Jiankai
Sun, Mona Anvari, Manasi Sharma, Dhruva Bansal, Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan Lou,
Caleb R Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei Xia, Yunzhu Li,
Silvio Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, C. Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior-1k: A
human-centered, embodied ai benchmark with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09227, 2024.
T. Lillicrap, J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1509.02971, 2016.
Haotian Lin, Pengcheng Wang, Jeff Schneider, and Guanya Shi. Td-m(pc)2: Improving temporal
difference mpc through policy constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03550, 2025.
Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero:
Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310,
2023.
Guanxing Lu, Wenkai Guo, Chubin Zhang, Yuheng Zhou, Haonan Jiang, Zifeng Gao, Yansong
Tang, and Ziwei Wang. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18719, 2025.
AJ Miller, Fangzhou Yu, Michael Brauckmann, and Farbod Farshidian.
High-performance re-
inforcement learning on spot: Optimizing simulation parameters with distributional measures.
arXiv preprint, 2025.
Diganta Misra. Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic neural activation function. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.08681, 2019.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jun Nakanishi, Jun Morimoto, G. Endo, Gordon Cheng, Stefan Schaal, and Mitsuo Kawato. Learn-
ing from demonstration and adaptation of biped locomotion with dynamical movement primitives.
Robotics and Autonomous Systems - RaS, 2004, 01 2003. doi: 10.1299/jsmermd.2004.32 2.
Michal Nauman, Marek Cygan, Carmelo Sferrazza, Aviral Kumar, and Pieter Abbeel. Bigger, regu-
larized, categorical: High-capacity value functions are efficient multi-task learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23150, 2025.
Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
Dasari, Joey Hejna, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Tobias Kreiman, You Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang
Chen, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems,
Delft, Netherlands, 2024.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00937, 2017.
Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Mad-
dukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay
Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khaz-
atsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg,
Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh
Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim,
Bernhard Sch¨olkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea
Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher
Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne
Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter B¨uchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao,
Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan,
Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang,
Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen,
Hiroki Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch,
Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake,
Jan Peters, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey
Wu, Jensen Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu,
Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, Jo˜ao Silv´erio, Joey
Hejna, Jonathan Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Jun-
hyek Han, Kaiyuan Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana
Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin
Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krish-
nan Srinivasan, Kuan Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent
Itti, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Lionel Ott,
Lisa Lee, Luca Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
Masha Itkina, Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip,
Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin
Kim, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J
Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier
Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani, Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick ”Tree” Miller, Patrick Yin,
Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel,
Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto
Mart’in-Mart’in, Rohan Baijal, Rosario Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan
Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kir-
mani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani,
Shubham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon
Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subrama-
nian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchan-
dani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas
Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Dar-
rell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vitor Guizilini, Wei Zhan,
Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu,
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao Lu, Yecheng Ja-
son Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying Xu, Yixuan
Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yue Cao,
Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang Li, Yunzhu
Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen Zhang,
Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X mod-
els. https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864, 2023.
OpenAI.
Introducing
openai
o1-preview.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-openai-o1-preview/, September 2024.
Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ee Darcet, Th´eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Seohong Park, Kevin Frans, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Ogbench: Benchmarking
offline goal-conditioned rl. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2025.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
PMLR, 2017.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
ment learning. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
2817–2826. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
Dean A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In D. Touretzky
(ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 1. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1988.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
8748–8763. PmLR, 2021.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning Complex Dexterous Manipulation with Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning and Demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
2018.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
St´ephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
Proceedings, 2011.
Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat: A
Platform for Embodied AI Research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ingmar Schubert, Jingwei Zhang, Jake Bruce, Sarah Bechtle, Emilio Parisotto, Martin Riedmiller,
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, and Nicolas Heess.
A
generalist dynamics model for control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10912, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In Hal Daum´e III and Aarti Singh (eds.),
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Younggyo Seo, Carmelo Sferrazza, Haoran Geng, Michal Nauman, Zhao-Heng Yin, and Pieter
Abbeel. Fasttd3: Simple, fast, and capable reinforcement learning for humanoid control. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.22642, 2025.
Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Joseph J. Lim, and Youngwoon Lee. Skill-based model-based reinforcement
learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Arth
Shukla.
Speeding
up
sac
with
massively
parallel
simulation.
https://arthshukla.substack.com, Mar 2025.
URL https://arthshukla.substack.
com/p/speeding-up-sac-with-massively-parallel.
Arth Shukla, Stone Tao, and Hao Su. Maniskill-hab: A benchmark for low-level manipulation in
home rearrangement tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13211, 2024.
Aravind Srinivas, Michael Laskin, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
tions for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04136, 2020.
Yi Su, Dian Yu, Linfeng Song, Juntao Li, Haitao Mi, Zhaopeng Tu, Min Zhang, and Dong Yu.
Crossing the reward bridge: Expanding rl with verifiable rewards across diverse domains. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.23829, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23829.
R. Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning, 3:9–44,
1998.
Stone Tao, Fanbo Xiang, Arth Shukla, Yuzhe Qin, Xander Hinrichsen, Xiaodi Yuan, Chen Bao,
Xinsong Lin, Yulin Liu, Tse kai Chan, Yuan Gao, Xuanlin Li, Tongzhou Mu, Nan Xiao, Arnav
Gurha, Viswesh Nagaswamy Rajesh, Yong Woo Choi, Yen-Ru Chen, Zhiao Huang, Roberto Ca-
landra, Rui Chen, Shan Luo, and Hao Su. Maniskill3: Gpu parallelized robotics simulation and
rendering for generalizable embodied ai. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2025.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, et al. Deepmind control suite. Technical report, DeepMind, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Miguel Vasco, Takuma Seno, Kenta Kawamoto, Kaushik Subramanian, Peter R. Wurman, and Peter
Stone. A super-human vision-based reinforcement learning agent for autonomous racing in Gran
Turismo. Reinforcement Learning Journal, 4:1674–1710, 2025.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Mel Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nico-
las Heess, Thomas Roth¨orl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller.
Leveraging demonstra-
tions for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jiayi Weng, Min Lin, Shengyi Huang, Bo Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Zichen
Liu, Yufan Song, Ting Luo, Yukun Jiang, et al. Envpool: A highly parallel reinforcement learning
environment execution engine. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22409–
22421, 2022.
Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos A. Theodorou. Model predictive path integral
control using covariance variable importance sampling. ArXiv, abs/1509.01149, 2015.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous con-
trol: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
In Conference on Robot Learning, 2019.
Albert Zhan, Philip Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. A framework for effi-
cient robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07975, 2020.
Jesse Zhang, Minho Heo, Zuxin Liu, Erdem Biyik, Joseph J Lim, Yao Liu, and Rasool Fakoor.
EXTRACT: Efficient policy learning by extracting transferrable robot skills from offline data. In
8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 3, 2008.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDICES
Webpage: https://www.nicklashansen.com/NewtWM
Related work: Appendix A
Recommendations for future work: Appendix B
MMBench: Appendices C−F
Newt: Appendices G−H
Additional results: Appendices I−L
A Related Work
20
B
Recommendations for Future Work
21
C Task domains
23
D Sample language instructions
26
E
Demonstrations
28
F
Baselines
28
G Description of Planning Algorithm
30
H Implementation Details
31
I
Open-Loop Control
34
J
Additional Experiments
35
K Per-Task Results
37
L
Loss Curves
44
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
RELATED WORK
Our work spans multiple research topics including (i) the development of new training environments,
(ii) benchmarks for evaluation of multitask policies, (iii) algorithms and infrastructure for large-scale
RL, and (iv) learning from demonstration. In the following, we aim to provide a comprehensive yet
concise overview of related work along each of these axes.
Benchmarks for multitask RL. Historically, most RL benchmarks have been designed for single-
task training and evaluation (Bellemare et al., 2013; Brockman et al., 2016; Tassa et al., 2018; Cobbe
et al., 2019; Tao et al., 2025). While some benchmarks evaluate policy learning and generalization
within a narrow task (Cobbe et al., 2019; Hansen & Wang, 2021; Kirk et al., 2023) or task family
(Kolve et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2019; Savva et al., 2019; Kannan et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Shukla
et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025; Joshi et al., 2025), multi-domain learning and generalization in the
context of RL remains mostly unexplored. Similarly, several works propose multi-embodiment
datasets for imitation learning in robotics (Open X-Embodiment Collaboration et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2024; Khazatsky et al., 2024) but we have yet to see a comparably large initiative for multitask and
multi-embodiment RL, let alone multi-domain RL. Our proposed benchmark
MMBench consists
of 10 distinct task domains, each of which contains a variety of different tasks and embodiments that
all have reward functions, demonstrations, language instructions, and optionally visual observations.
Scaling RL. Existing literature has predominantly explored scaling of control policies in the context
of imitation learning, where access to large demonstration datasets for supervised policy learning
(e.g. behavior cloning) is assumed (Jang et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022; Schubert et al., 2023;
Brohan et al., 2023; Open X-Embodiment Collaboration et al., 2023; Octo Model Team et al., 2024;
Black et al., 2024). Perhaps most similar to ours, Reed et al. (2022) learns a multi-domain control
policy via supervised learning on more than 63M demonstrations collected in various simulation
environments. Although this is an impressive feat, relying on the availability of large amounts of
expert demonstrations is highly impractical if not infeasible for many downstream applications, and
the capabilities of the resulting agent is inherently limited by the behavior policy (e.g. a human
or learned specialist policy) that generated the demonstrations. For this reason, the community is
increasingly turning to RL for training and finetuning of agents with superhuman capabilities in
game-playing (Berner et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022; Baker et al., 2022;
Vasco et al., 2025), reasoning and agentic AI (OpenAI, 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025),
and most recently robotics (Hafner et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Miller
et al., 2025; Nauman et al., 2025; DYNA Robotics, 2025). In particular, TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al.,
2024) presents a model-based RL algorithm that can be trained on up to 80 tasks across 2 domains
(DMControl and Meta-World) using offline RL on a large dataset of 545M transitions collected by
specialist policies. However, RL still remains brittle to changes in learning dynamics (Fujimoto
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Hansen et al., 2023b; Farebrother et al.,
2024), hyperparameters (Huang et al., 2022a; Hussing et al., 2024), and task specification (Clark
& Amodei, 2016; Kirk et al., 2023) as evidenced by our ablations in Figure 8 and our zero-shot
results in Table 1. Additionally, scaling of RL is often bottlenecked by training infrastructure and
interaction throughput (Espeholt et al., 2019; Weng et al., 2022; Tao et al., 2025; Shukla, 2025; Seo
et al., 2025). We provide a comprehensive benchmark for multi-domain RL accompanied by robust
training infrastructure and a practical RL algorithm (
Newt) that consumes various data sources
and modalities.
Learning from demonstration. Demonstrations and offline data have been used to bootstrap poli-
cies (Nakanishi et al., 2003; Ross et al., 2011; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Pinto et al., 2017; Duan et al.,
2017; Peng et al., 2019; Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Baker et al., 2022; Ball et al., 2023), overcome the
difficulty of exploration in sparse reward tasks (Vecerik et al., 2017; Hester et al., 2018; Rajeswaran
et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2020; Hansen et al., 2023a; Feng et al., 2023), and initialize multitask skills
before online improvement with RL (Shi et al., 2022; Shukla et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Lu
et al., 2025). By providing demonstrations for 200 tasks, MMBench provides a new, challenging
testbed for massively multitask imitation learning, online RL, and offline-to-online RL in a common
task suite that allows for fast, reliable, and reproducible measures of algorithmic improvement, and
our agent Newt serves as a strong baseline for the community to build upon in this new paradigm.
A research direction that we believe MMBench is especially suited for is finetuning of pretrained
generalist models such as vision-language-action models (VLAs) using online RL as explored in Lu
et al. (2025) for a narrower set of tasks than we consider in this work.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE WORK
This work introduces MMBench, a benchmark for massively multitask RL, as well as Newt, a
language-conditioned multitask world model trained with online RL. We demonstrate that online
RL on hundreds of tasks simultaneously is indeed feasible, and that it can lead to world models
with surprisingly strong generalization and open-loop control capabilities. We are excited by these
encouraging results, and look forward to seeing in which ways the research community will build
upon our work. In the following, we detail interesting open research questions and opportunities
for future work in this area in hopes of inspiring new innovations. Specifically, we believe that the
following 7 topics will have great potential for impact over the coming years:
• Visual RL. While MMBench and Newt fully support high-resolution (224 × 224) RGB obser-
vations, the majority of our experiments in this work are limited to low-dimensional (128-d)
state observations. Training visual RL policies has substantially higher hardware requirements,
particularly so in terms of GPU memory if one is to store the replay buffer in GPU memory for
fast sampling – and this is especially true in the massively multitask setting since it is necessary
to retain some amount of data for each task. We believe that improving the practicality of vi-
sual RL remains an important research goal, and we see two future directions that could help
alleviate the computational cost: (1) further pretraining of the visual encoder and world model
on the provided demonstrations and/or large out-of-domain datasets, and (2) innovations in data
pipelines that go beyond the typical first-in-first-out replay buffer.
• Language understanding. We find that language understanding is currently a bottleneck for
task generalization despite leveraging pretrained language embeddings from CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021). This may, in part, be due to the limited number of language instructions: one
fixed instruction per task for a total of 200 tasks. We expect language understanding to improve
as the number of training tasks increases, but we also believe that additional techniques such as
data augmentation, pretraining on external datasets that contain language instructions, learning
from language at the token-level rather than embeddings, or any other techniques that seek to
improve the agent’s ability to interpolate instructions will be immensely helpful.
• Pretraining and improved base models. Pretraining of the Newt agent is currently limited to
supervised learning on a demonstration dataset. Our ablations show that improving the pretrain-
ing stage leads to consistently better performance both pre- and post-RL, so we expect further
improvements and scaling of the model pretraining to be a valuable research direction. We expect
training of agents for embodied decision-making and control to eventually resemble the training
recipe of contemporary reasoning models (OpenAI, 2024; Guo et al., 2025) in which significant
resources are invested into large-scale pretraining of an agent before any RL is performed.
• Neural architectures. Our Newt agent is based on the TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) archi-
tecture which has proven to perform well across a variety of tasks and model sizes. However,
the architecture remains rather simple: each component of the world model architecture is a de-
terministic MLP (except for the Gaussian policy prior). We believe that leveraging more recent
architectural innovations such the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and Diffusion Policy (?)
could potentially lead to further performance improvements, but their integration into model-
based RL algorithms remains relatively unexplored.
• Model capabilities. Our initial explorations into the capabilities of our Newt agent indicate that
it is capable of open-loop control across hundreds of tasks, and that it can be rapidly adapted
to new tasks and embodiments using online RL. However, further research into the emerging
capabilities (and current limitations) of massively multitask agents is warranted. For example,
the structure of the emerging (learned) latent state space and by extension dynamics modeling is
not well understood, but we believe that improved understanding of emerging behavior in agents
will help inform the design of future agents and neural architectures for model-based RL.
• Learning strategies. We find convergence rate to differ substantially between tasks and task
domains. This is perhaps not surprising as tasks vary greatly in complexity, degree of random-
ization, and reward specification. While our experiments show that the provided demonstrations
greatly improve data-efficiency as well as asymptotic performance of our Newt agent, we believe
that more sophisticated training strategies may also lead to better data-efficiency and asymp-
totic performance. Two directions that appear particularly interesting are (1) learning curricula
that dynamically balance environment interaction (data collection) for each task based on task
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
progress, and (2) non-uniform sampling methods or training objectives that prioritize sampling
from tasks or subtrajectories that are particularly useful.
• Training environments and datasets. We believe that further scaling of the environments and
datasets used for training of world models will continue to drive performance and lead to bet-
ter generalization abilities. Development of additional RL environments using e.g. procedural
generation, agentic AI, or other generative methods is thus a promising research direction, in
addition to training techniques that incorporate existing large-scale datasets from other domains.
Overall, we remain very optimistic about the future of massively multitask RL training, and hope
that our emphasis on transparency and sharing of code, data, and checkpoints will inspire other
researchers to do the same.
—— Appendices continue on the next page ——
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MMBench
Appendices B−E
C
TASK DOMAINS
We consider 200 tasks across 10 domains. Our task set is comprised of diverse continuous control
tasks spanning robot manipulation, locomotion, navigation, arcade games, and classic control prob-
lems, each varying in task complexity, time horizon, observation and action space dimensionality,
and reward formulation. Although we cannot provide detailed information about every task due to
the sheer number of tasks considered, this section aims to give the reader a brief overview of the
types of tasks used in our experiments. Table 4 provides an overview of the task domains considered.
Table 4. Overview of task domains. Our selection of tasks cover a wide range of task types, state
and action dimensionalities, time horizons, and reward formulations. We summarize them below.
Task domain
State dim
Action dim
Ep. length
Reward
RGB
min
max
min
max
min
max
DMControl
3
78
1
12
500
500
dense/sparse
224 × 224
DMControl Ext.
3
19
1
7
500
500
dense/sparse
224 × 224
Meta-World
39
39
4
4
100
100
dense
224 × 224
ManiSkill3
10
42
1
12
25
500
dense/sparse
224 × 224
MuJoCo
4
105
1
8
50
1000
dense/sparse
224 × 224
MiniArcade
4
44
1
2
200
500
dense/sparse
224 × 224
Box2D
8
24
2
4
500
500
dense
224 × 224
RoboDesk
73
73
5
5
100
100
dense
224 × 224
OGBench
9
42
2
8
100
1000
dense
224 × 224
Atari
128
128
3
3
1000
1000
sparse
224 × 224
C.1
DMCONTROL
DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018) is a benchmark for continuous control and features a variety of lo-
comotion, manipulation, and control tasks with simple embodiments. It is available at https://
github.com/google-deepmind/dm_control. All tasks are designed as infinite-horizon
MDPs (no termination conditions), and all tasks have a fixed episode length of 500 when an ac-
tion repeat of 2 is applied, as is standard practice for this benchmark (Yarats et al., 2021; Hafner
et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2024). Reward formulation varies between tasks; some tasks have dense
(shaped) rewards whereas others are sparse and only provide a non-zero reward on success. DM-
Control tasks do not have a notion of success, but episode returns are designed to be in [0, 1000] for
every task, so we produce a normalized score for this benchmark by scaling the returns to the [0, 1]
interval. Note that this does not guarantee that a score of 1.0 can be obtained in all DMControl tasks,
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
it is simply an upper bound. We consider 21 tasks from this domain. Examples of tasks included in
our DMControl training set are Finger Turn Hard, Fish Swim, and Quadruped Run.
C.2
DMCONTROL EXTENDED
DMControl Extended is, as the name implies, an extended task set based on the original DMControl
environment. We include 11 custom tasks previously proposed by Hansen et al. (2024) (which
are all available at https://www.tdmpc2.com), and design an additional 5 locomotion tasks
across 3 new embodiments: Jumper, Spinner, and Giraffe. Tasks included in this task set follow
the same recipe as the original DMControl benchmark: a fixed episode length of 500 steps, and
episode returns in [0, 1000] which we normalize by scaling down to [0, 1]. We consider 16 tasks
from this domain. Examples of tasks included in our DMControl Extended training set are Walker
Run Backward, Cheetah Jump, and Spinner Spin.
C.3
META-WORLD
Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019) is a benchmark for robotic table-top manipulation tasks with a Sawyer
robot and end-effector position control, and it is readily available at https://github.com/
Farama-Foundation/Metaworld. It consists of 50 diverse manipulation tasks that all share
a common observation- and action space to facilitate multitask learning. We use a fixed episode
length of 100 steps (after applying an action repeat of 2), and no terminal conditions. Meta-World
provides dense reward functions and success criteria for each task in the task suite; we report binary
task success at end of episode as the normalized score for Meta-World tasks. We exclude one task,
Shelf Place, from our training set due to an issue with the simulation, and consider the remaining 49
tasks from this domain. Examples of tasks included in our Meta-World training set are Assembly,
Bin Picking, and Lever Pull.
C.4
MANISKILL3
ManiSkill3 (Tao et al., 2025) is an open-source simulator and task suite for embodied AI. It fea-
tures a wide range of tasks and embodiments including tabletop manipulation, quadruped loco-
motion, whole-body humanoid control, mobile manipulation, as well as reproductions of popu-
lar control tasks from MuJoCo and DMControl. Official documentation is available at https:
//maniskill.readthedocs.io. Observation and action spaces are defined on a per-task ba-
sis but is relatively consistent within a specific group of tasks. For example, most ManiSkill3 table-
top robotic manipulation tasks share a common observation space, but the action space depends on
the specific robot embodiment and control mode. Robot embodiments in our ManiSkill3 task set
include Franka Emika Panda, SO100, and xArm6 for manipulation, and Anymal for locomotion, in
addition to simpler MuJoCo-like embodiments such as Ant, Hopper, and Cartpole. Control modes
include end-effector position control, end-effector 6D pose control, and joint position control. We
use the default episode lengths for each task but apply an action repeat of 2 and use no terminal
conditions. ManiSkill3 provides dense reward functions and success critera for most tasks in the
task suite, but not all. We use a dense reward function when one is available. We report binary task
success at end of episode as the normalized score for ManiSkill3 tasks whenever one is available,
and episode return normalized to the [0, 1] interval otherwise. Note that this does not guarantee that
a score of 1.0 can be obtained in all ManiSkill3 tasks, it is simply an upper bound. We consider a to-
tal of 36 tasks from this domain, of which 5 tasks are new and created specifically for our paper; we
intend to submit a pull request to the official ManiSkill3 code repository with our proposed task ad-
ditions. Examples of tasks included in our ManiSkill3 training set are Stack Cube, Pick Screwdriver,
and Anymal Reach.
C.5
MUJOCO
MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) is an open-source physics simulator and classic benchmark in the
reinforcement learning and continuous control research communities. Official documentation for the
tasks is available at https://gymnasium.farama.org/environments/mujoco. Tasks
in this suite are diverse in terms of embodiments and all have different observation and action spaces.
We use the default episode lengths for each taks but apply an action repeat of 2 for some of the tasks.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
We use the v4 version of the tasks and disable all termination conditions to be in line with our other
task domains. All tasks have pre-defined reward functions, some of which are sparse (only non-zero
reward when success is reached), and we report episode return normalized to the [0, 1] interval as
normalized score for MuJoCo tasks. We consider a total of 6 tasks from this domain. Examples of
tasks included in our MuJoCo training set are Ant, Half-cheetah, and Reacher.
C.6
MINIARCADE
MiniArcade is a new task suite created specifically for this paper, implemented using pygame
(https://github.com/pygame/pygame).
It consists of 22 tasks spanning 14 unique
arcade-style environments. Tasks vary greatly in task objective, episode length, observation and
action space dimensionality, as well as reward formulation. All tasks have a fixed episode length
and no termination conditions. We design each task to fully support low-dimensional state repre-
sentations, RGB image observations, and a combination of the two. We define normalized return
by pre-defined success criteria for tasks where it is appropriate to do so, and otherwise use episode
return normalized to the [0, 1] interval. As a result, there is no guarantee that a score of 1.0 can
be obtained in all MiniArcade tasks, it is simply an upper bound. We consider a total of 19 tasks
from this domain for training, and have fully open-sourced the entire task suite for the community
to build upon. Examples of tasks included in our MiniArcade training set are Spaceship, Coconut
Dodge, and Chase-Evade.
C.7
BOX2D
Box2D is a small collection of 2D environments created for the original release of OpenAI Gym
(Brockman et al., 2016).
Official documentation for the environments is available at https:
//gymnasium.farama.org/environments/box2d.
The tasks vary in task objective,
episode length, and observation and action space dimensionalities. We use a fixed episode length for
every task by disabling termination conditions. The Box2D tasks that we consider were originally
designed for low-dimensional state observations, so we have modernized the implementations and
added support for visual observations, including (visual) domain randomization to promote more
generalizable visual control policies. Tasks in this task suite have pre-defined dense reward func-
tions that we use for policy learning, and we report normalized score as episode return normalized
to the [0, 1] interval. Note that this does not guarantee that a score of 1.0 can be obtained in all
Box2D tasks, it is simply an upper bound. We consider a total of 8 tasks and task variations based
on the original OpenAI Gym environments; 5 for the Bipedal Walker environnment and 3 for the
Lunarlander environment. Examples of tasks included in our Box2D training set are Bipedal Walker
(Obstacles), Lunarlander Land, and Lunarlander Takeoff.
C.8
ROBODESK
RoboDesk (Kannan et al., 2021) is a small suite of robotic manipulation tasks designed for mul-
titask RL research. It includes 9 object manipulation tasks in a single desk-themed environment,
and all tasks share a common observation and action space. An implementation of RoboDesk is
available at https://github.com/google-research/robodesk. The benchmark is ex-
plicitly designed for visual RL but also supports low-dimensional state observations. All tasks have
a fixed episode length and no terminal conditions, and both dense reward functions for policy learn-
ing and success criteria for evaluation are provided; we use the success rate as normalized score for
RoboDesk. We consider 6 tasks from this domain. Examples of tasks included in our RoboDesk
training set are Push Green, Open Drawer, and Place Flat Block in Bin.
C.9
OGBENCH
OGBench (Park et al., 2025) is a benchmark designed to facilitate research in offline goal-
conditioned RL. It consists of multiple distinct environments and embodiments, and supports both
low-dimensional state representations as well as RGB image observations. OGBench was developed
with multi-goal but not multi-embodiment learning in mind, and the action space dimensionality
thus depends on the particular task. Tasks vary greatly in episode length, but we use a fixed episode
length for each task without any terminal conditions. Because OGBench was not designed for online
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
RL, we define dense reward functions for tasks where one was not previously defined, and modify
the observation space to include all relevant task information (e.g. goal position). Unlike the orig-
inal OGBench environments available at https://github.com/seohongpark/ogbench,
we treat different goal positions within the same scene configuration as the same task. To increase
environment difficulty and diversity, we create a series of novel scene configurations for the 2D
point mass and Ant (quadruped) goal-conditioned navigation environments. We use success rate as
normalized score for all but one task (Ant locomotion) which does not have a clear metric of success;
we thus use episode return normalized to the [0, 1] interval for this task. We consider 12 tasks based
on the original OGBench environments; 5 tasks for the 2D point mass embodiment and 7 for the Ant
embodiment. Examples of tasks included in our OGBench training set are Ant Soccer, Point Mass
(Maze), and Ant (Bottleneck).
C.10
ATARI
The Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013), often referred to as simply Atari or
ALE, is an interface for a collection of diverse and often challenging Atari 2600 games origi-
nally designed for human play. The ALE is a long-standing benchmark for RL algorithms, and
has traditionally been used primarily for single-task visual RL benchmarking with a discrete ac-
tion space. More recently, Farebrother & Castro (2024) has proposed a non-linear continuous-
to-discrete action transformation that extends support to agents with continuous action spaces,
which makes it a suitable task suite for our purposes. An implementation of ALE with support
for continuous action spaces is available at https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/
Arcade-Learning-Environment. However, several properties of ALE still make it chal-
lenging to apply directly to our problem setting: (1) the ALE is built for visual RL and unlike our
other task domains it does not support low-dimensional state representations for each game; and
(2) games vary by several orders of magnitude in terms of episode length, with a single episode in
games like Assault sometimes exceeding 100, 000 steps with a human-level agent. To address the
first challenge, we opt for the (admittedly not ideal) solution of using the raw game RAM state,
which can be represented as a 128-dim vector, as our low-dimensional state representation. While
we have verified that single-task agents are able to achieve non-trivial performance in all games con-
sidered, we recognize that using the raw RAM state as observation limits the potential for cross-task
knowledge transfer. We therefore expect visual policies to have better potential for generalization
in the Atari domain. To address the second challenge, we simplify our problem setting by limiting
agents to a fixed episode length of 1, 000. Each Atari game varies greatly in their reward formula-
tion, but games generally assign sparse rewards only at key events such as scoring a goal or losing
a life. The games have no clear success criteria and we thus choose to use episode return normal-
ized to the [0, 1] interval as normalized score for this domain. The linear transformation between
episode return and normalized score is defined for each task and takes the shorter episode length into
account. However, this does not guarantee that a score of 1.0 can be obtained in all Atari games,
it is simply an upper bound. We consider 27 tasks (games) from this domain. Examples of tasks
included in our Atari training set are Ms. Pacman, Bowling, and Space Invaders.
D
SAMPLE LANGUAGE INSTRUCTIONS
We manually define language instructions for all 200 training tasks considered in this work. Our
language instructions have two components: (1) a description of the embodiment, including how
many controllable joints or action dimensions the given task has; and (2) a short task instruction
in plain language. We make an effort to be consistent in our description of embodiments, action
spaces, and tasks, while still providing enough language variation for generalization to be feasible.
We provide a small subset of our language instructions in the following.
Walker Run (DMControl)
Embodiment: 2D walker with 6 controllable joints across 2 legs.
Instruction: Run forward as fast as possible.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Walker Run Backward (DMControl Ext.)
Embodiment: 2D walker with 6 controllable joints across 2 legs.
Instruction: Run backward quickly.
Jumper Jump (DMControl Ext.)
Embodiment: 2D jumper with 2 controllable joints across 2 legs.
Instruction: Jump as high as possible.
Plate Slide (Meta-World)
Embodiment: Sawyer robot with a 2-finger gripper and delta end-effector position control.
Instruction: Slide the hockey puck into the goal.
Anymal Reach (ManiSkill3)
Embodiment: Quadruped (Anymal robot) with 12 controllable joints across 4 legs.
Instruction: Reach target.
Stack Cube (ManiSkill3)
Embodiment: Franka robot with a 2-finger gripper and delta end-effector 6D-pose control.
Instruction: Stack the red cube on top of the green cube.
Half-cheetah (MuJoCo)
Embodiment: 2D MuJoCo half-cheetah with 6 controllable joints.
Instruction: Run forward as fast as possible.
Bipedal Walker Obstacles (Box2D)
Embodiment: 2D cartoonish bipedal walker with 4 controllable joints across 2 legs.
Instruction: Traverse the various obstacles quickly.
Lunarlander Land (Box2D)
Embodiment: 2D lunar lander with 2 controllable thrusters.
Instruction: Land safely on the landing pad.
Open Slide (RoboDesk)
Embodiment: Franka robot with a 2-finger gripper and delta joint position control.
Instruction: Open the sliding door.
Ant Maze (OGBench)
Embodiment: Ant (quadruped) with 8 controllable joints (4 legs).
Instruction: Navigate through a maze to reach the red goal.
Bird Attack (MiniArcade)
Embodiment: 2D shooter game with 2 controllable actions: move and fire.
Instruction: Eliminate all enemies in a space-invaders style game.
Chase & Evade (MiniArcade)
Embodiment: 2D chase and evade game with X and Y movement.
Instruction: Take turns being the chaser or evader.
Ms. Pacman (Atari)
Embodiment: Atari game with 3 controllable actions: radius, theta, and fire.
Instruction: Eat pellets and avoid ghosts in a game of Ms. Pacman.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
E
DEMONSTRATIONS
To aid in research on pretraining + finetuning of massively multitask agents we provide an ex-
pert demonstration dataset for MMBench. This dataset contains 10-40 demonstrations per task
(depending on task difficulty) for a total of 4020 demonstrations, which are all collected by single-
task TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) agents trained from low-dimensional state observations. Each
single-task agent is trained for 5M environment steps (Atari: 10M) to ensure that performance has
converged, although we observe that training converges earlier than that on most tasks. Training a
single-task agent for 5M environment steps takes approx. 6 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX 5090
GPU, totaling an estimated 1,300 GPU hours to train expert policies for every task in MMBench.
To ensure that only successful demonstrations are collected, we reject episodes that do not result
in success (when available) or have episode returns that are substantially (> 25%) lower than the
median for that task. Table 5 provides an overview of our demonstration dataset. For completeness,
we also release all 200 checkpoints that generated the provided demonstrations; these checkpoints
can be used to generate additional checkpoints, or be used for e.g. teacher-student policy distillation.
Table 5. Demonstrations. An overview of the demonstrations provided for each task domain.
Task domain
Num. tasks
Demos per task
Total demos
DMControl
21
20
420
DMControl Ext.
16
20
320
Meta-World
49
10
490
ManiSkill3
36
20
720
MuJoCo
6
20
120
MiniArcade
19
10
190
Box2D
8
40
320
RoboDesk
6
20
120
OGBench
12
20
240
Atari
27
40
1080
Total
200
−
4020
F
BASELINES
BC. Our multitask behavior cloning (BC) implementation closely follows that of our pretraining
stage for Newt, except that it only consists of two components: the encoder h and policy p. Both
encoder and policy are conditioned on language instructions, and are trained with a BC objective that
mask invalid action dimensions such that all action vectors contribute equally to the loss regardless
of number of valid dimensions for that particular task. Our single-task BC policies are identical to
the multitask BC policies except they are not conditioned on language instructions.
PPO. We base our PPO implementation off of the cleanRL (Huang et al., 2022b) implementation
available here: https://github.com/vwxyzjn/cleanrl/tree/master/cleanrl/
ppo_continuous_action_isaacgym, and extend it to support language-conditioning and
per-task discount factors such that comparison to our method is fair. We find that the default imple-
mentation and hyperparameters performs poorly in our massively multitask RL setting, so we make
a number of additional changes. Specifically, we find that (i) using a tanh-Normal policy improves
training stability, that (ii) increasing the number of trainable parameters from 0.5M to 3.5M leads to
marginally better performance throughout training, and that (iii) using longer policy rollouts (128),
more mini-batches and epochs (8), a smaller value loss coefficient (1), scaled down environment
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
rewards (0.1×), and clipping of both the surrogate objective and value function. An empirical com-
parison of our PPO implementation before and after these changes can be found in Appendix J; we
find that these changes approximately double its average score at 100M environment steps, but that
both implementations perform relatively poorly compared to FastTD3 and Newt.
FastTD3. We base our TD3 implementation off of FastTD3 (Seo et al., 2025) which is avail-
able here: https://github.com/younggyoseo/FastTD3, an improved implementation
of TD3 designed for the era of RL with large amounts of parallel environments. FastTD3 demon-
strates robust learning across a number of different benchmarks described in Seo et al. (2025),
but has not previously been evaluated in a multi-domain setting. We extend FastTD3 to support
language-conditioning for compatibility with MMBench, as well as per-task discount factors to
make value estimation easier across tasks. We find that n-step returns of 8 are critical in our chal-
lenging multitask setting and we thus use that value by default. Appendix J shows the performance
of FastTD3 for different values of n.
Model-based pretraining. This baseline is equivalent to the pretraining stage of Newt. Specifically,
we pretrain all components from Equation 1 as described in Section 3.2 for a total of 200, 000
iterations, and report performance results without planning (simply using the policy prior as behavior
policy) as we find it to perform the best immediately following the pretraining stage; planning
eventually outperforms the policy prior but initially suffers from an inaccurate value function.
—— Appendices continue on the next page ——
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Newt
Appendices F−G
G
DESCRIPTION OF PLANNING ALGORITHM
Our planning algorithm closely follows that of TD-MPC2, which uses a variant of the Cross-
Entropy Method (CEM) or Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI; (Williams et al., 2015)) for tra-
jectory optimization with the learned world model. Specifically, TD-MPC2 plans trajectories by
fitting a time-dependent multivariate Gaussian with diagonal covariance to a value landscape esti-
mated with rollouts from the world model. Starting from an initial distribution parameterized by
(µ0, σ0)t:t+H, µ0, σ0 ∈Rm, A ∈Rm, where t is the current time step and H is the planning hori-
zon, we iteratively refit parameters (µ, σ) to a weighted average of the value estimates of a small set
of ”elite” trajectories (those whose estimates are in the top-K of trajectories sampled that given iter-
ation), and sample another set of trajectories based on the updated parameters. After a fixed number
of planning iterations, the algorithm samples a trajectory from the final optimized distribution and
the agent executes the first action in the returned sequence.
When evaluating our agent in a closed-loop manner, we replan trajectories at every time step and
initialize µ0, σ0 with the one-step shifted parameters of the previous time step (receding horizon
MPC). When evaluating in an open-loop manner, the planning procedure returns the entire action
sequence and we execute them one by one without replanning nor any environment feedback. To
warm-start the planning procedure, TD-MPC2 generates a fixed number of action sequences by
rolling out the model (in the latent space) using actions coming from the policy prior and adds them
to the set of action sequences sampled at every iteration of the planning procedure. Our proposed
constraint on the planning procedure early in training (when the model is less accurate than the
policy prior pretrained on demonstrations, as we discuss in Section 3.2) initializes (µ0, σ0) as a
linear interpolation between the action distribution coming from the policy prior p and the Guassian
prior used in TD-MPC2. Our annealing schedule is visualized in Figure 11. We refer the reader to
Hansen et al. (2022) and Hansen et al. (2024) for more information about the planning procedure.
0
20M
40M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Constrained planning
Annealing schedule
Ours
Figure 11. Constrained planning. We find that biasing planning towards the action distribution of
the pretrained policy helps with exploration early in training and mitigates a drop in performance
when switching from the pretrained model-free policy to planning with a world model. We use a
simple linear annealing schedule (from 2M to 12M steps) as shown here.
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
H
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Language embeddings. We use text embeddings from openai/clip-vit-base-patch32
(CLIP; (Radford et al., 2021)) which outputs continuous embeddings of 512 dimensions. Embed-
dings are visualized in a low-dimensional space in Figure 5.
Image embeddings. We use RGB image embeddings from facebook/dinov2-base (DI-
NOv2; Oquab et al. (2023)) which outputs continuous embeddings of 768 dimensions. We do
not use frame stacking in our experiments, but expect it to improve downstream performance as the
added history information allows models to infer e.g. velocity information from visual observations.
Network architecture. All learnable components from Equation 1 are implemented as MLPs. The
encoder h contains a variable number of layers depending on the architecture size, and we also vary
the number of Q-functions in our ensemble when training larger or smaller models than our default
model size of 20M learnable parameters. MLPs consist of linear layers followed by LayerNorm
(Ba et al., 2016) and Mish (Misra, 2019) activation functions, and the latent state representation is
normalized using a simplicial embedding as originally proposed by Lavoie et al. (2023) and later
applied in an RL context by Hansen et al. (2024). We summarize our Newt architecture for the
default 20M parameter state-based agent with language-conditioning using a PyTorch-like notation:
Encoder (2,235,904 parameters): ModuleDict(
(state): Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=640, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=512, bias=True, act=Simplicial)
)
)
Dynamics (2,645,504 parameters): Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=1040, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=512, bias=True, act=Simplicial)
)
Reward (2,223,205 parameters): Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=1040, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): Linear(in_features=1024, out_features=101, bias=True)
)
Policy prior (2,136,096 parameters): Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): Linear(in_features=1024, out_features=32, bias=True)
)
Q-functions (11,116,025 parameters): QEnsemble(
(_Qs): ModuleList(
(0-4): 5 x Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=1040, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): Linear(in_features=1024, out_features=101, bias=True)
)
)
)
When the agent is conditioned on image embeddings in addition to state and language, the encoder
is expanded as follows:
Encoder (3,022,336): ModuleDict(
(state): Sequential(
(0): NormedLinear(in_features=1408, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(1): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=1024, bias=True, act=Mish)
(2): NormedLinear(in_features=1024, out_features=512, bias=True, act=Simplicial)
)
and the total parameter count increases to 21M. We experiment with four model sizes: 2M pa-
rameters, 5M parameters, our default model with 20M parameters, and a larger model with 80M
parameters; Table 6 details the specific architecture for each model size.
Latent state normalization. The simplicial embedding (Lavoie et al., 2023) is a simple method for
normalization of the latent representation z by projecting it into L fixed-dimensional simplices using
a softmax operation, which was first applied in an RL context by Hansen et al. (2024). A key benefit
of embedding z as simplices (as opposed to e.g. a discrete representation or squashing) is that it
naturally biases the representation towards sparsity without enforcing hard constraints. Intuitively,
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
the simplicial embedding can be thought of as a ”soft” variant of the vector-of-categoricals approach
to representation learning proposed by Oord et al. (2017) (VQ-VAE). Whereas VQ-VAE represents
latent codes using a set of discrete codes (L vector partitions each consisting of a one-hot encoding),
a simplicial embedding partitions the latent state into L vector partitions of continuous values that
each sum to 1 due to the softmax operator. This relaxation of the latent representation is akin to
softmax being a relaxation of the arg max operator. We follow Lavoie et al. (2023) and TD-MPC2
(Hansen et al., 2024) without modification and implement the simplicial normalization layer using
PyTorch-like notation as follows:
def simplicial(self, z, V=8):
shape = z.shape
z = z.view(*shape[:-1], -1, V)
z = softmax(z, dim=-1)
return z.view(*shape)
Here, z is the latent representation z, and V is the dimensionality of each simplex. The number of
simplices L can be inferred from V and the dimensionality of z. We apply a softmax to each of L
partitions of z to form simplices, and then reshape to the original shape of z. Refer to Lavoie et al.
(2023) for more details.
Table 6. Model sizes. Architecture changes that we make for our scaling experiments. Encoder
dim is the dimensionality of each hidden layer in the state encoder, MLP dim is the dimensionality
of hidden layers in all other parts of the agent, Latent dim is the dimensionality of the latent state
representation, # enc layers is the number of encoder layers, and Q-ensemble is the number of Q-
functions in the ensemble. We highlight our default model parameters in bold.
Parameters
2M
5M
20M
80M
Encoder dim
128
256
1024
2048
MLP dim
256
512
1024
2048
Latent dim
384
512
512
704
# enc layers
2
2
3
4
Q-ensemble
3
5
5
7
Heuristic for discount factors. Following TD-MPC2, we use the following heuristic to determine
a suitable discount factor for tasks for which no default discount factor is available:
γ = clip(
T
5 −1
T
5
, [0.95, 0.995])
(4)
where T is the episode length after applying action repeat, and clip bounds the discount factor to
the interval [0.95, 0.995]. This heuristic ensures that tasks with short episodes are assigned a low
discount factor, and vice-versa for tasks with long episodes.
Hyperparameters. Our hyperparameters are listed in Table 7 for the default 20M parameter agent.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 7.
Hyperparameters. We detail relevant hyperparameters for our method below, corre-
sponding to our default 20M parameter agent. Our choice of hyperparameters closely follow that of
TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) with a few exceptions which we highlight in bold.
Hyperparameter
Value
Planning
Horizon (H)
3
Iterations
6
Population size
512
Policy prior samples
24
Number of elites
64
Minimum std.
0.05
Maximum std.
2
Temperature
0.5
Momentum
No
Constrained planning
Anneal from 2M →12M steps
Policy prior
Log std. min.
−10
Log std. max.
2
Replay buffer
Capacity
10, 000, 000
Sampling
Uniform
Architecture (5M)
Encoder layers
3
Encoder dim
1024
MLP dim
1024
Latent state dim
512
Activation
LayerNorm + Mish
Number of Q-functions
5
Number of reward/value bins
101
Simplicial dim (V )
8
Simplicial temperature (τ)
1
Optimization
Update-to-data ratio
0.075
Batch size
1024
Joint-embedding coef.
20
Reward prediction coef.
0.1
Value prediction coef.
0.1
BC coef.
10
Temporal coef. (λ)
0.5
Q-fn. momentum coef.
0.99
Policy prior entropy coef.
1 × 10−4
Policy prior loss norm.
Moving (5%, 95%) percentiles
Optimizer
Adam
Learning rate
3 × 10−4
Encoder learning rate
1 × 10−4
Gradient clip norm
20
Discount factor
Heuristic
33

--- Page 34 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Additional results
Appendices H−K
I
OPEN-LOOP CONTROL
Finger Turn Hard (DMControl)
t = 0
t = 16
t = 32
t = 48
Assault (Atari)
t = 0
t = 16
t = 32
t = 48
Poke Cube (ManiSkill)
t = 0
t = 8
t = 16
t = 24
Push Green (RoboDesk)
t = 0
t = 8
t = 16
t = 24
Figure 12. Additional qualitative results for open-loop control. Executing open-loop plans with-
out any environment feedback. Our results demonstrate that Newt learns meaningful representations.
Table 8. Open-loop control. Quantitative results when planning for 48 or 24 consecutive time steps,
depending on the task. We report the fraction of original closed-loop control performance achieved
in an open-loop manner after 33%, 66%, and 100% of the planned time steps. Higher is better ↑.
Task
t = 16
t = 32
t = 48
Walker Walk
0.68
0.40
0.25
Finger Turn Hard
0.41
0.39
0.29
Assault
0.00
0.10
0.08
Lunarlander Takeoff
0.67
0.40
0.34
Average
0.44
0.32
0.24
Task
t = 8
t = 16
t = 24
Point Maze
0.88
0.67
0.37
Pick Screwdriver
0.95
0.89
0.83
Poke Cube
0.50
0.38
0.35
Push Green
0.95
0.89
0.83
Average
0.82
0.71
0.60
34

--- Page 35 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl Ext.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Meta-World
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ManiSkill
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
MuJoCo
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
Box2D
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
RoboDesk
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
OGBench
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
MiniArcade
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Atari
BC
Model-based pretraining
No demos
No language
Ours
Figure 13. Per-domain performance (additional baselines). Average score of a single agent in
each of the 10 task domains in MMBench (200 tasks). These baselines complement the results
shown in Figure 14.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DMControl Ext.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Meta-World
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ManiSkill
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
MuJoCo
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
Box2D
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
RoboDesk
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
OGBench
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
MiniArcade
0
50M
100M
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Atari
No planning
Ours
Figure 14. Per-domain performance (ablation on planning). Average score of a single agent in
each of the 10 task domains in MMBench (200 tasks). We compare the performance of our method
with and without planning with MPC. The default formulation of Newt uses planning; the baseline
without planning instead uses the learned policy prior for decision-making. Our results indicate that
planning plays a key role in massively multitask online RL, but that the policy prior in rare cases
(MuJoCo) may outperform planning.
35

--- Page 36 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.5
FastTD3 n−step
200 tasks
n = 1
n = 8
n = 16
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.5
PPO hyperparams
200 tasks
Our PPO
Default PPO
Ours
Figure 15. Ablations on baselines. We compare baseline performance across different hyperparam-
eter configurations, and find that it has moderate impact on data-efficiency and overall performance.
Table 9. Comparison to single-task TD-MPC2 agents. Performance (normalized score; higher
is better ↑) comparison between our multitask Newt agent trained for a total of 100M environment
steps across all tasks (500k per task), and single-task TD-MPC2 agents trained until convergence
(5M environment steps per task; 1B total steps across all tasks). We also include more fair compar-
isons in which the population of single-task agents have been exposed to the same total number of
environment steps as our Newt agent. We observe that the multitask agent generally lags behind the
population of single-task agents in terms of performance but that the extent to which that is the case
varies drastically between task domains.
Multitask
Single-task
Task domain
Num. tasks
Newt
TD-MPC2
@20M
@100M
@20M
@100M
@1B
DMControl
21
0.49
0.50
0.32
0.67
0.81
DMControl Ext.
16
0.26
0.37
0.24
0.60
0.78
Meta-World
49
0.32
0.50
0.53
0.70
0.79
ManiSkill3
36
0.52
0.69
0.36
0.77
0.92
MuJoCo
6
0.18
0.20
0.35
0.64
0.82
MiniArcade
19
0.40
0.44
0.50
0.75
0.94
Box2D
8
0.19
0.33
0.60
0.87
0.86
RoboDesk
6
0.42
0.38
0.48
0.67
0.82
OGBench
12
0.29
0.30
0.43
0.65
0.93
Atari
27
0.14
0.13
0.13
0.24
0.51
Total
200
0.31
0.44
0.38
0.65
0.80
36

--- Page 37 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
K
PER-TASK RESULTS
0.0
0.5
1.0
Walker Stand
Walker Walk
Walker Run
Cheetah Run
Reacher Easy
0.0
0.5
1.0
Reacher Hard
Acrobot Swingup
Pendulum Swingup
Cartpole Balance
Cartpole Balance Sparse
0.0
0.5
1.0
Cartpole Swingup
Cartpole Swingup Sparse
Cup Catch
Finger Spin
Finger Turn Easy
0.0
0.5
1.0
Finger Turn Hard
Fish Swim
Hopper Stand
Hopper Hop
Quadruped Walk
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Quadruped Run
Ours
Figure 16. DMControl. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly
trained on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0 Walker Walk Backward
Walker Run Backward
Cheetah Run Backward
Cheetah Run Front
Cheetah Run Back
0.0
0.5
1.0
Cheetah Jump
Hopper Hop Backward
Reacher Three Easy
Reacher Three Hard
Cup Spin
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pendulum Spin
Jumper Jump
Spinner Spin
Spinner Spin Backward
Spinner Jump
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Giraffe Run
Ours
Figure 17. DMControl Extended. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent
jointly trained on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all
tasks.
38

--- Page 39 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
Assembly
Basketball
Button Press Topdown Button Press Topdown Wall
Button Press
0.0
0.5
1.0
Button Press Wall
Coffee Button
Coffee Pull
Coffee Push
Dial Turn
0.0
0.5
1.0
Disassemble
Door Open
Door Close
Drawer Close
Drawer Open
0.0
0.5
1.0
Faucet Open
Faucet Close
Hammer
Handle Press Side
Handle Press
0.0
0.5
1.0
Handle Pull Side
Handle Pull
Lever Pull
Peg Insert Side
Peg Unplug Side
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pick Out Of Hole
Pick Place
Pick Place Wall
Plate Slide
Plate Slide Side
0.0
0.5
1.0
Plate Slide Back
Plate Slide Back Side
Push Back
Push
Push Wall
0.0
0.5
1.0
Reach
Reach Wall
Soccer
Stick Push
Stick Pull
0.0
0.5
1.0
Sweep Into
Sweep
Window Open
Window Close
Bin Picking
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Box Close
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Door Lock
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Door Unlock
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Hand Insert
Ours
Figure 18. Meta-World. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly
trained on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
39

--- Page 40 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
Ant Walk
Ant Run
Cartpole Balance
Cartpole Swingup
Hopper Stand
0.0
0.5
1.0
Hopper Hop
Pick Cube
Pick Cube EE-pose
Pick Cube SO
Poke Cube
0.0
0.5
1.0
Push Cube
Pull Cube
Pull Cube Tool
Stack Cube
Place Sphere
0.0
0.5
1.0
Lift Peg
Pick Apple
Pick Banana
Pick Can
Pick Hammer
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pick Fork
Pick Knife
Pick Mug
Pick Orange
Pick Screwdriver
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pick Spoon
Pick Tennis Ball
Pick Baseball
Pick Cube xArm6
Pick Sponge
0.0
0.5
1.0
Anymal Reach
Reach
Reach EE-pose
Reach xArm6
Cartpole Balance Sparse
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0Cartpole Swingup Sparse
Ours
Figure 19. ManiSkill. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained
on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
Ant
Half-cheetah
Hopper
Inverted Pendulum
Reacher
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Walker
Ours
Figure 20. MuJoCo. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained
on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Bipedal Walker Flat
Bipedal Walker Uneven
Bipedal Walker Rugged
Bipedal Walker Hills
Bipedal Walker Obstacles
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Lunarlander Land
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Lunarlander Hover
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Lunarlander Takeoff
Ours
Figure 21. Box2D. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained on
all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Push Red
Push Green
Push Blue
Open Slide
Open Drawer
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Flat Block In Bin
Ours
Figure 22. RoboDesk. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained
on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
41

--- Page 42 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
Push Red
Push Green
Push Blue
Open Slide
Open Drawer
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Flat Block In Bin
Ours
Figure 23. OGbench. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained
on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Cowboy
Coinrun
Spaceship
Pong
Bird Attack
0.0
0.5
1.0
Highway
Landing
Air Hockey
Rocket Collect
Chase Evade
0.0
0.5
1.0
Coconut Dodge
Cartpole Balance
Cartpole Swingup
Cartpole Balance Sparse Cartpole Swingup Sparse
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Cartpole Tremor
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Point Maze Var1
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Point Maze Var2
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Point Maze Var3
Ours
Figure 24. MiniArcade. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly
trained on all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
42

--- Page 43 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
1.0
Alien
Assault
Asterix
Atlantis
Bank Heist
0.0
0.5
1.0
Battle Zone
Beamrider
Boxing
Chopper Command
Crazy Climber
0.0
0.5
1.0
Double Dunk
Gopher
Ice Hockey
Jamesbond
Kangaroo
0.0
0.5
1.0
Krull
Ms Pacman
Name This Game
Phoenix
Pong
0.0
0.5
1.0
Road Runner
Robotank
Seaquest
Space Invaders
Tutankham
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
0.0
0.5
1.0
Up'N'Down
0
50M
100M
Environment steps
Yars Revenge
Ours
Figure 25. Atari. Per-task normalized scores for our 20M parameter Newt agent jointly trained on
all 200 tasks from MMBench. Environment steps refers to total steps across all tasks.
43

--- Page 44 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
L
LOSS CURVES
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.12
0.14
0.16
Total loss
200 tasks
No language
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
Self−prediction loss
200 tasks
No language
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
Reward loss
200 tasks
No language
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
Value loss
200 tasks
No language
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
−0.25
−0.20
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
Policy loss
200 tasks
No language
Ours
0
20M
40M
60M
80M 100M
Environment steps
0.2
0.4
0.6
Grad norm
200 tasks
No language
Ours
Figure 26. Loss curves for our method with and without language instructions. These curves indi-
cate that learning is stable across both agents, but that the agent with access to language instructions
generally has a lower loss during training.
44