--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
H2OFLOW:
GROUNDING HUMAN-OBJECT AFFOR-
DANCES WITH 3D GENERATIVE MODELS AND DENSE
DIFFUSED FLOWS
Harry Zhang
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
harryz@mit.edu
Luca Carlone
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
lcarlone@mit.edu
ABSTRACT
Understanding how humans interact with the surrounding environment, and
specifically reasoning about object interactions and affordances, is a critical chal-
lenge in computer vision, robotics, and AI. Current approaches often depend on
labor-intensive, hand-labeled datasets capturing real-world or simulated human-
object interaction (HOI) tasks, which are costly and time-consuming to produce.
Furthermore, most existing methods for 3D affordance understanding are lim-
ited to contact-based analysis, neglecting other essential aspects of human-object
interactions, such as orientation (e.g., humans might have a preferential orienta-
tion with respect certain objects, such as a TV) and spatial occupancy (e.g., hu-
mans are more likely to occupy certain regions around an object, like the front
of a microwave rather than its back). To address these limitations, we introduce
H2OFlow, a novel framework that comprehensively learns 3D HOI affordances —
encompassing contact, orientation, and spatial occupancy— using only synthetic
data generated from 3D generative models. H2OFlow employs a dense 3D-flow-
based representation, learned through a dense diffusion process operating on point
clouds. This learned flow enables the discovery of rich 3D affordances without the
need for human annotations. Through extensive quantitative and qualitative evalu-
ations, we demonstrate that H2OFlow generalizes effectively to real-world objects
and surpasses prior methods that rely on manual annotations or mesh-based rep-
resentations in modeling 3D affordance.
1
INTRODUCTION
The rapid advancement of AI and robotics demands next-generation agents that can perceive and
interact with the world as seamlessly as humans do. A key aspect of human intelligence is the innate
ability to recognize the functionalities offered by objects and environments —allowing us to effort-
lessly adapt to unstructured settings like homes. For AI agents to achieve similar generalization,
they must learn how to interact with objects based on their intended purpose —a concept known
as affordance. First introduced by psychologist James Gibson Gibson (2014), the concept of af-
fordance has become an important topic for advancing AI and robot capabilities in our daily life.
A plethora of studies have been conducted on affordances for visual recognition Hou et al. (2021);
Hong et al. (2023), action prediction Roy & Fernando (2021); Chen et al. (2023), and functionality
understanding Li et al. (2023a); Zhang et al. (2023); Kim et al. (2024). Understanding affordances
through the lens of human-object interactions (HOIs) also offers a compelling approach for teaching
AI agents. By observing how humans manipulate and interact with objects, we can extract rich cues
about objects’ functionality, thus enabling a broader set of interactions for AI agents.
However, prior work in HOI affordance learning has largely focused on contact-based affordances,
which is a restrictive subset of all possible affordances. For instance, recent methods estimate contact
scores from RGB images Bahl et al. (2023; 2022); Li et al. (2023a), 3D point clouds Chu et al.
(2025); Yang et al. (2023), or human models Hassan et al. (2021), by relying on densely annotated
human-object contact labels. This manual supervision is not only labor-intensive but also fails to
generalize to novel objects and broader classes of interaction.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Synthetic  
3D HOIs
Contact 
Affordance
Orientational 
Affordance
Spatial 
Affordance
Figure 1: H2OFlow learns comprehensive affordances from synthetic 3D HOI data generated by 3D
generative models using a novel representation. The learned affordance captures contact, orienta-
tional, and occupancy information based on input object point clouds.
We observe that human-object interactions (HOIs) involve 3D spatial relationships beyond simple
contact. For example, human faces, torsos, and arms often maintain characteristic distances and
orientations relative to objects, with natural variations across interactions. For instances, humans
would grasp different tools with different hand configurations: a hammer is typically held at a
specific distance from its head, with the wrist angled to allow effective striking, while a pen is
gripped closer to the tip for finer control. A complete understanding of affordances in HOIs should
incorporate these geometric patterns, including relative positioning and orientational tendencies.
A recent work by Kim et al. (2024) introduces the concept of comprehensive affordance, which
captures these relationships probabilistically. Instead of binary contact labels, their method mod-
els a distribution over possible 3D spatial and orientational relations between every pair of object
and human surface points. This approach generalizes affordance reasoning beyond contact, en-
abling finer-grained understanding of interaction geometry. As shown in Kim et al. (2024), learning
comprehensive affordances in HOIs typically relies on synthetic RGB images uplifted to 3D using
2D-to-3D techniques. However, this approach requires intricate masking methods to achieve high-
quality results, introducing multiple potential failure modes. Furthermore, the learned affordances
often fail to generalize to novel real-world objects, and the dependency on well-defined watertight
meshes for better-quality affordance computation severely limits real-world applicability.
To address these challenges, we leverage recent advances in 3D generative models for HOIs Li et al.
(2024a); Diller & Dai (2024); Peng et al. (2023). Our key innovation is a pipeline that directly
generates plausible 3D HOI samples using generative models, eliminating the need for error-prone
2D-to-3D uplifting. To ensure generalization to novel geometries, we subsample points from the
generated data and employ dense diffused flows Eisner et al. (2022) —a technique proven effective
for modeling multi-modality— to reconstruct 3D humans from the HOI samples. For comprehensive
affordance learning, we introduce a novel probabilistic formulation operating directly on human-
object point cloud pairs, circumventing the need for a watertight mesh.
This culminates in Human-Object Flow (H2OFlow), a framework for learning rich affordance
knowledge in HOIs (Fig. 1). Our key contributions are:
1. A point-cloud-based affordance representation that efficiently captures both explicit contact and
implicit non-contact interaction patterns in HOIs from raw point clouds inputs.
2. A synthetic data generation and learning pipeline, which leverages 3D generative models and
dense diffused flows, that learns flexible affordances from synthetic 3D point clouds.
3. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrating the effectiveness and practical
utility of the learned affordances on both synthetic datasets and real-world data.
2
RELATED WORK
Affordance Learning. First introduced in Gibson (2014), affordance learning has emerged as a crit-
ical capability for AI and robotic systems. Modern approaches focus on enhancing agents’ ability
for better visual recognition Hou et al. (2021); Hong et al. (2023), action prediction Roy & Fernando
(2021); Chen et al. (2023), functionality understanding Li et al. (2023a); Eisner et al. (2022); Kim
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
et al. (2024), mimicking scene-conditioned human-object and hand-object interactions Bhatnagar
et al. (2022); Lu et al. (2022); Nguyen et al. (2024); Jiang et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022); Jiang
et al. (2022); Petrov et al. (2023); Hassan et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2022). With the advances
of LLMs, more works have been proposed to explore open-vocabulary affordances in point clouds
Nguyen et al. (2024); Chu et al. (2025). However, most works focus exclusively on contact-based
affordances, neglecting crucial spatial and orientational aspects of interactions. Moreover, the re-
quirement of manual labeling of the contact regions Do et al. (2018); Jian et al. (2023); Tripathi
et al. (2023); Delitzas et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2023) is deemed cumbersome and restrictive when
generalizing to the real world. More recently, Kim et al. (2024) proposed a comprehensive set of
affordance representations that captures both contact and non-contact knowledge in HOIs without
manual labels. While such comprehensive affordances work well in capturing both contact and
spatial relations, they require to calculate the normal directions of each vertex and the inferred af-
fordances have limited generalization to novel objects. We instead propose a novel set of affordance
representations that operates on (partially observed) point cloud data, bypassing the need of water-
tight meshes, and generalizes to unseen objects via learned dense diffused flows.
3D Flows in Visual Learning. 3D flows have emerged as a powerful representation in visual learn-
ing, playing a key role in both policy learning Hu et al. (2017); Bahl et al. (2022; 2023) and object
understanding Eisner et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2024); Cai et al. (2024). By capturing how points
in 3D space move over time, 3D flows inherently encode affordances under external forces. For
instance, predicting flow on articulated objects reveals how individual parts might move when inter-
acted with by a human. While prior work has largely focused on learning 3D flows for rigid objects,
we extend this intuition to the human body. Specifically, we propose to learn 3D flows that predict
how each point on the human body moves when interacting with an object. Given the multi-modal
and highly deformable nature of human-object interactions (HOIs), we leverage diffusion models
Ho et al. (2020); Rombach et al. (2022); Ramesh et al. (2022); Nakayama et al. (2023); Peebles &
Xie (2023) to learn these flows in a dense and expressive manner. We refer to this representation as
dense diffused flows. As we show later, dense diffused flows generalize well to unseen objects and
we are able to infer comprehensive affordance knowledge using such a representation.
HOI Data Synthesis in 3D. With the growing availability of paired scene-motion datasets Ara´ujo
et al. (2023); Hassan et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2022b); Zheng et al. (2022), a range of methods has
been developed to synthesize human interactions in 3D environments Brahmbhatt et al. (2019a;b;
2020); Ara´ujo et al. (2023); Hassan et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2022a); Taheri et al. (2020); Zhou
et al. (2022); Ye et al. (2023). Another line of research leverages reinforcement learning to train
scene-aware policies that generate navigation and interaction motions in static 3D scenes Xiao et al.
(2023); Lee & Joo (2023). More recently, with the rise of large language models and the avail-
ability of paired human-object motion data Bhatnagar et al. (2022); Li et al. (2023b), several works
have demonstrated the ability to predict human-object interactions (HOIs) from sparse waypoints
or textual descriptions Li et al. (2024a); Diller & Dai (2024); Peng et al. (2023), enabling direct
generation of 3D HOI data from language. In H2OFlow, we leverage the pre-trained model from
Li et al. (2024a) to synthesize a diverse set of HOI sequences from text. These sequences are rich
in affordance cues that go beyond mere contact information. We then subsample vertices from the
resulting human-object meshes to generate point clouds for downstream learning of dense diffused
flows. At inference time, our model requires only a partially observed object point cloud to infer
affordances.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
We address the problem of learning comprehensive human-object interactions (HOIs) from point
cloud data. Given a human point cloud H = {hi}NH
i=1 ∈RNH×3 and an object point cloud O =
{oj}NO
j=1 ∈RNO×3, our goal is to infer a novel affordance representation that captures three key
aspects of interaction: contact, orientation, and spatial configuration. Figure 2) provides an overview
of H2OFlow.
We define an affordance score for each pair of human-object points (i, j). The contact affordance,
denoted as Cij ∈R, reflects the likelihood of contact between human point hi and object point oj,
with higher values indicating actual contact. The orientational affordance, denoted as Rij ∈R,
captures the characteristic orientation patterns of human body parts relative to the object (e.g., the
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
forearms’ rotation relative to the table top is more uniform than the feet’s in Figure 2). A higher
Rij value indicates a consistent and meaningful orientation pattern observed during interactions.
The spatial affordance, denoted as Sij ∈RH×W ×L, over a voxel grid of size H × W × L,
characterizes the spatial occupancy of human body parts around the object, assigning higher scores
to regions frequently occupied during interactions in 3D space (e.g., the orange region in the spatial
affordance of Figure 2 tends to get occupied by human more than the purple region).
DiT
Contact
Orientational
Spatial
Object
Training Data
Unseen Object
Sampling Learned Dense Diffused Flows
Inferring Affordances
Figure 2: H2OFlow overview. We generate synthetic 3D HOI mesh samples, process the meshes into
a point cloud and train DiT to learn a dense diffused flow distribution for human goal configuration
prediction. Upon seeing an unseen object, H2OFlow samples learned dense flows to reconstruct
goal humans. Using the flows and point clouds, we are able to infer comprehensive affordances.
Note the “Object” affordance here is the transpose of the human contact affordance matrix.
4
METHOD
To learn affordance knowledge from point clouds in a generalizable manner, we propose H2OFlow,
a framework that first synthesizes diverse human-object interaction (HOI) samples using a pre-
trained 3D generative model as the training data. Then, we train a diffusion model that takes as
input an object point cloud and predicts human interactions in the form of dense diffused flows Xu
et al. (2024), a probabilistic representation that predicts per-point displacement on the human point
cloud conditioned on the HOI. During inference, these flows are then used to comprehensively infer
HOI affordances —contact, orientation, and spatial— directly from the object point cloud.
4.1
TRAINING DATA: SYNTHETIC HOI SAMPLES GENERATION
We employ a pretrained 3D generative model to generate diverse and realistic HOI mesh sequences.
Given an initial object-human configuration and a language prompt, the pre-trained generative model
generates temporally synchronized object and human motions. The outputs are long mesh sequences
comprising varied and rich interaction dynamics across different object categories. Please refer to
the Training Data illustration of Figure 2 for examples.
One might ask: why can’t we directly learn affordances from generative model outputs? There are
two main problems that hinder the generalizability of directly inferring affordances from synthetic
HOIs Kim et al. (2024). First, such generative models are trained with object meshes, while in-
puts from raw-sensor data contain noisy point clouds, making such an approach incompatible with
real-world data. Second, it is costly to generate and analyze 3D HOI meshes, creating a large com-
putational and memory bottleneck. Thus, it is imperative for us to find a way that generalizes well
to unseen point clouds for practicality, while maintaining a lower computational cost. We make use
of dense diffused flow, a representation that lends itself well to point cloud learning.
4.2
AN INTERMEDIATE REPRESENTATION: DENSE FLOWS
To better generalize to unseen objects, H2OFlow reconstructs plausible human configurations from
a given object point cloud O using an intermediate, point-based representation, dense flows Zhang
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2024); Cai et al. (2024), which can be applied to both rigid and deformable
objects. Dense flows represent how each point transitions from its initial to its target configuration.
We assume the initial human pose is given by a standard 0-pose (T-pose) SMPL mesh1. From this
mesh, we sample NH points {π(1), π(2), ..., π(NH)} to construct the initial human point cloud
H0, where π(·) denotes the sampling operator. To obtain the goal human configuration from a
synthesized HOI mesh, we sample the same NH points to create the goal human point cloud H,
ensuring one-to-one correspondence.
Using this setup, we compute the dense flow field F = {f i}NH
i=1 as the per-point displacement
between the goal and initial configurations of the human:
f i := hi −h0,i,
∀i ∈{1, . . . , NH},
(1)
which can be compactly written as F := H −H0. As illustrated in the Learned Dense Diffused
Flows in Figure 2, we can sample F conditioned on the object point cloud to reconstruct diverse goal
human point clouds. We provide more detailed dense flows visualization in Figure 6 of Section C.
In summary, given a generic 0-pose human point cloud H0 and an input object point cloud O,
H2OFlow predicts a dense flow field that displaces H0 into a realistic interaction configuration H,
effectively modeling the human-object interaction through spatial deformation2.
4.3
LEARNING THE DENSE FLOWS REPRESENTATION
Human-object interactions (HOIs) in both real-world scenarios and synthesized samples exhibit
strong multimodality. For instance, a human may contact an object using either the left or right
hand, or interact with different regions of the same object. This diversity highlights the need for a
distributional representation of dense flow that captures a continuous spectrum of plausible human
configurations, rather than a single deterministic outcome.
To this end, we aim to learn a distribution over dense flows conditioned on an object point cloud:
g(H0, O) = pθ(F | O), where H0 is the initial human point cloud and F is the dense flow field.
At inference time, we can sample a plausible dense flow F ∼pθ(F | O) and reconstruct a goal
human configuration via H = H0 + F .
To effectively model this complex distribution, we adopt diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Sohl-
Dickstein et al. (2015); Peebles & Xie (2023), which learn data distributions through iterative for-
ward noising and reverse denoising processes. By applying this framework to dense flow prediction,
we introduce the concept of dense diffused flow, enabling our model to generate diverse and plausible
human poses in interaction with a given object.
Diffusion Process. Given a synthetic HOI sample point cloud pair (H, O) and a canonical 0-pose
human point cloud H0, we train a diffusion model to learn the distribution over dense flows F .
The ground-truth dense flow is defined as the per-point displacement between the goal and initial
configurations:
F GT = H −H0.
(2)
Following standard diffusion modeling practices Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2020), we construct
a noisy version of the clean dense flow F 0 := F GT by sampling at time step t ∼{1, . . . , T}:
F t = √¯αtF 0 + √1 −¯αtϵ, where ϵ ∼N(0, I) is Gaussian noise, and ¯αt is the cumulative product
of noise scheduling parameters βt. The forward process adds Gaussian noise progressively over time
steps, while the reverse process learns to denoise and recover the original F 0. We parameterize the
reverse process as: pθ(F t−1 | F t) = N(F t−1; µθ(F t), Σθ(F t)), and supervise the model using
the hybrid loss from Nichol & Dhariwal (2021) that combines the noise loss with a new cumulative
KL- loss using the derived Σθ(F t).
During inference, given an object point cloud O and a generic 0-pose human point cloud H0, we
initialize the dense diffused flows as Gaussian noise: F T ∼N(0, I). The dense diffused flows are
iteratively denoised via the reverse process. The final denoised flows F 0 are then used to transform
the points of H into a predicted interaction configuration H0 + F 0 with respect to the object O.
1Please refer to Appendix Section B for details on placing the 0-pose human relative to the object.
2Dense flows representation is the fundamental reason for H2OFlow’s generalizability, and we discuss this
design and advantages over prior works in more details in Appendix Section G.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Dense Diffused Flows from Diffusion Transformer. Diffusion Transformers (DiT) Peebles & Xie
(2023) have demonstrated strong capability in modeling multi-modal point cloud distributions for
deformable objects Cai et al. (2024). We adopt DiT as the backbone for predicting dense diffused
flows. At each diffusion timestep, the model takes as input the noised flow F t, the human point
cloud H, the object point cloud O, and the timestep t. Using MLP encoders with shared weights,
we extract per-point features from each input: dense flow features f F from F t, human features
f H from H, and object features f O from O. The dense flow and human features are concatenated
to form joint features f F H, which serve as the input to the DiT model, conditioned on the object
features f O. Within each DiT block, self-attention is first applied to the joint human-flow features
f F H to enable local reasoning across the human point cloud and coordinate flow predictions. Then,
cross-attention is applied between f F H and the object features f O to capture global human-object
interaction patterns. This process is repeated across N DiT blocks, after which the network outputs
the predicted noise ϵθ and the interpolation vector vθ. We explain the training objective (hybrid
loss) and details in Section F.
4.4
TEST TIME: COMPREHENSIVE AFFORDANCE INFERENCE
During inference, with the learned diffusion model, we can sample flows conditioned on an object
point cloud, resulting in a distribution over possible human goal configurations. Given an initial
human point cloud H0 and a sampled flow F ∼pθ(F | O), the goal human is given by H =
H0 + F and each point of the sampled predicted human hi = h0,i + f i. For each predicted human
point hi, we define a conditional probability distribution with respect to each object point oj:
Pij := p(hi | oj)
(3)
Thus, Pij defines the possible human points locations in diverse HOI samples. In practice, this
distribution is defined over a large set of generated HOI samples. Our three affordance types —
contact, orientational, and spatial— are then defined over this pairwise distribution Pij, resulting
in a per-point-pair evaluation of affordance.
Contact Affordance. We define the contact affordance score cij between human point hi and object
point oj as:
cij = Ehi∼Pij

wij · exp (−∥dij∥)
τ

,
(4)
where dij = hi −oj denotes the per-pair displacement between human point and object point, wij
denotes the cross-attention weight between hi and oj from the DiT model, and τ is a temperature
hyperparameter that controls sensitivity to distance.
Intuitively, the contact affordance score cij is higher when the human and object points are likely
to be spatially close during HOI. The inclusion of the cross-attention weight wij further enhances
contact prediction by leveraging semantic alignment from the DiT model, especially in cases where
contact is not perfectly captured in the sampled HOI configurations.
Orientational Affordance. Following the intuition from prior work Kim et al. (2024), we aim
to capture the consistency and pattern of human body part orientations relative to object geometry
using an entropy-based formulation. The key idea is that a lower entropy in the orientation distri-
bution implies a stronger, more consistent orientational pattern during interaction, indicating a high
orientational affordance. However, unlike Kim et al. (2024), which computes surface normals to
measure orientation–often computationally expensive and unstable under noisy meshes–we lever-
age the predicted dense diffused flows directly as a proxy for directional motion. Specifically, for
each human-object point pair (i, j), we compute a relative orientation vector using the cross product
between the displacement vector dij (from human point hi to object point oj) and the diffused flow
vector f i:
xij =
dij × f i
∥dij × f i∥.
(5)
The cross-product xij, intuitively, represents the relative displacement direction between the human
and the object given the human dense flow direction, efficiently grounding the per-pair information
on the overall flow direction. To evaluate the distribution of these orientation vectors, we discretize
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Dense Diffused Flow
Object-Human Displacement
Cross-Product
Contact
Orientational
Spatial
Figure 3: Visual illustration of affordance inference. Given predicted human point clouds, contact
affordance assigns high scores to human-object point pairs that are close. Orientational affordances
give higher scores to point pairs that yield more uniform cross-product directions (i.e., hand points)
and vice versa (i.e., foot points). The spatial affordances output higher scores to regions surrounding
the object that are often occupied by human parts. A video of the figure is available at this website.
the unit sphere S2 into nb bins with representative directions {n1, . . . , nnb}. The discrete probabil-
ity of xij falling into bin n is computed using a Gaussian kernel:
px,ij(n) ∝exp

−∥xij −nn∥2
2σ2

,
n = 1, . . . , nb,
(6)
where σ is a hyperparameter. This defines a distribution over orientation bins on the sphere. We
then compute the negated Shannon entropy of this distribution:
Hij = En∼S2 [log px,ij(n)] ,
(7)
which becomes higher when orientations concentrate around specific directions.
Finally, we define the orientational affordance score Rij as the expectation of this negated entropy
over the distribution of possible human configurations:
Rij = Ehi∼Pij

wij · Hij
τ

,
(8)
where wij is the cross-attention weight from the DiT model and τ is a temperature hyperparameter.
Since a uniform distribution has high entropy, while structured behavior has low entropy, a low
Rij indicates that the orientation distribution px,ij(n) is nearly uniformly random —i.e., no domi-
nant pattern exists— whereas a high Rij reflects consistent and structured orientational behavior in
human-object interactions3.
Spatial Affordance. Lastly, we aim to capture the 3D spatial occupancy pattern of human surface
points with respect to object geometry, following ideas from prior work Han & Joo (2023); Kim
et al. (2024). This affordance measures the likelihood that a specific region in space is occupied by
a part of the human body during interaction with the object.
We define a voxel grid G ∈RH×W ×L, covering the spatial region around the object. For each voxel
g ∈G, we introduce an indicator function δij that equals 1 if the voxel g contains the human point
hi, and 0 otherwise. The spatial affordance score is then defined as the expected occupancy of voxel
g by point hi, conditioned on the interaction with object point oj:
Sij = Ehi∼Pij[δij]
(9)
This formulation results in a discrete occupancy map over the voxel grid, which can be further
analyzed as a spatial probability distribution. Learning spatial affordance helps us understand the
typical spatial arrangement or positioning of the human body relative to the object during interaction.
3We propose advanced use cases of orientational affordance in Section N.2.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Baseline
SIM-H ↑
SIM-O ↑
MAE-H ↓
MAE-O ↓
Precision@K ↑
MSE↓
COMA
41.3 ± 2.2%
56.9 ± 1.4%
0.22 ± 0.07
0.14 ± 0.03
42.9 ± 7.2%
0.14 ± 0.06
COMA-Recon
20.7 ± 4.1%
31.8 ± 1.9%
0.62 ± 0.11
0.51 ± 0.05
9.1 ± 2.4%
0.66 ± 0.12
H2OSMPL
57.3 ± 2.1%
68.0 ± 3.3%
0.21 ± 0.03
0.15 ± 0.03
53.6 ± 1.9%
0.14 ± 0.01
H2OFlow-NoAttn
67.3 ± 1.6%
76.4 ± 2.4%
0.15 ± 0.02
0.09 ± 0.01
69.2 ± 1.1%
0.12 ± 0.01
H2OFlow
72.3 ± 1.3%
81.0 ± 2.4%
0.11 ± 0.03
0.07 ± 0.01
75.6 ± 3.1%
0.12 ± 0.01
Table 1: Quantitative comparisons with various baselines on OMOMO dataset. Note that -H and -O
represent human and object contact results.
In practice, this representation avoids reliance on high-quality surface meshes and is highly efficient:
operations are parallelizable on GPUs, and memory usage is minimized by sampling only a small
subset of points from both the human and object point clouds.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We present both quantitative and qualitative results to evaluate H2OFlow. We use a pretrained
CHOIS Li et al. (2024a) as the 3D generative model backbone to generate diverse HOIs. During
training, we apply random perturbation and occlusion to the objects point cloud to achieve real-
world robustness. We compare against baseline methods in terms of affordance learning quality,
memory efficiency, and runtime performance. For the qualitative evaluation, we demonstrate how
H2OFlow surpasses traditional contact-based affordances via distributions over orientational and
spatial information across a diverse range of object categories.
5.1
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
Baselines.
We compare H2OFlow against COMA Kim et al. (2024) using objects from the
OMOMO test set Li et al. (2023b). Since COMA requires 2D object images to generate inpainted
HOI samples, we render each OMOMO object from 50 camera views. To ensure a fair comparison,
we also reconstruct object meshes from H2OFlow’s point cloud inputs and render them from the
same views as input to COMA —this serves as the COMA-Recon baseline. We include a variant
of our method, H2OSMPL, where we learn a direct SMPL predictor using diffusion conditioned on
the object input. Additionally, we include a variant of our method, H2OFlow-NoAttn, which re-
moves the cross-attention mechanism used for aggregating affordance scores. All methods generate
50 HOI samples per object for evaluation.
Metrics.
For contact affordance, we compute the similarity (SIM) Swain & Ballard (1991) and
mean absolute error (MAE) between the normalized predicted and ground-truth contact distribu-
tions. For orientational affordance, we rank human vertices by the average entropy of their relative
orientations in ground-truth HOIs, and compare these to rankings based on the predicted orienta-
tional scores. We report Precision@K by measuring the overlap between the top-K ranked sets. For
spatial affordance, we calculate the mean squared error (MSE) between predicted and ground-
truth voxel occupancy grids.
Results. As seen in Table 1, for all metrics, H2OFlow outperforms other baselines by a very notice-
able margin. We note that COMA’s performance breaks when the input 2D rendered mesh images
are reconstructed from point clouds. Moreover, learning dense diffused flows results in better per-
formance than learning SMPL parameters directly. We analyze why this is the case in Appendix
Section L. H2OFlow performs better with attention weights in contact and orientational affordances
aggregation. We provide results on the BEHAVE dataset and contact-only baselines in Appendix
Section I and Section J. Note that COMA, to our knowledge, is the only prior work addressing
different types of affordances. We test H2OFlow’s robustness against occlusion in Appendix Sec-
tion K.
Memory and Runtime Comparisons.
Experiments suggest that H2OFlow utilizes significantly
less memory and runs faster than COMA. This is expected in that H2OFlow operates on sparse point
clouds. We document quantitative comparisons in Appendix Section M.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Objects
Predicted HOIs
Object Contacts
Human Contacts
Orientational
Spatial
Figure 4: Visualizations of affordances inferred from flows prediction with color maps. H2OFlow
infers diverse affordance distributions from predicted HOI samples on unseen objects.
5.2
QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Learned Affordances Visualizations. We showcase sample inferred affordances in Figure 4. The
qualitative results are also run on the test objects of the OMOMO dataset, unseen during the training
of H2OFlow. For each object, we pick two points on the object that give us interesting interaction
information. Both contact affordance and orientation affordance reflect diverse, multimodal distri-
butions from the predicted HOI samples. Depending on the points on the object, human contact
affordances reflect different heatmaps, and different parts of the human also exhibit different orien-
tational tendencies. In Figure 8, we provide more examples. Specifically, in the monitor example of
Figure 8, the selected bottom (orange) point makes more contact with the side of the body while the
center (blue) point makes frequent contact with the whole torso, which reflects real-world contact
tendency when moving a monitor. For the tripod in Figure 8, human legs tend to exhibit a more uni-
form orientation relative to the bottom of the tripod (orange) than their hands, while the orientation
of the hands relative to the top part of the tripod (blue) is more uniform. For spatial affordance, we
can see the high-level human occupancy around the object during HOIs: the high-probability regions
are more frequently occupied by the human body parts, consistent with real-world interactions (in
some cases, full human silhouettes are observed).
With Attention Weights
Without Attention Weights
(a) Atten-
tion usage.
Object
Point Cloud
H2OFlow 
Contact
H2OFlow
Orientation
(b) Real point clouds results.
Figure 5: (a) Ablations on cross-attention weights and (b) results on real-world point clouds. Objects
shown are: monitor, trashcan, backpack handle & panel, chair, yoga ball, table, box, and suitcase.
Cross-Attention Weights Ablation. We ablate the effect of incorporating cross-attention weights
into the computation of affordance scores, as shown in Figure 5a. With cross-attention weights, both
the contact and orientational affordances exhibit greater symmetry compared to the variant without
attention. This is particularly valuable in low-sample scenarios, where sampling only a few instances
from the diffusion model may result in limited diversity and fail to fully capture the underlying multi-
modal distribution. Cross-attention weights mitigate this issue by learned geometric associations
between human and object. Even when the sampled outputs are sparse, the attention weights act as
a corrective signal, producing plausible and semantically aligned affordance estimations.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Affordance Types Ablation. We are interested in studying the contribution of orientational and
spatial affordances beyond contact. We design two downstream HOI inference tasks and vary only
which affordance terms are computed and used for downstream scoring. We evaluate downstream
HOI inference tasks on unseen objects and test on the following variants of H2OFlow affordances
output: (1) C: use cij only, (2) C+O: use cij and Rij, (3) C+S: use cij and Sij, (4) Shuffled:
keep cij but randomly permute Rij across human indices or Sij across voxels per object, and (5)
C+O+S: use all three affordances (H2OFlow default). To combine terms for downstream scoring
we use a normalized linear fusion ϕij = λc bcij + λo bRij + λs bSij. We design two downstream HOI
inference tasks: (1) HOI Region Retrieval: Given an object query point oj, rank human points
by ϕij; compute mAP@{1,5,10} against GT contact points, and (2) Pose Selection: Given sampled
HOI hypotheses per object, select arg maxk
P
i,j ϕ(k)
ij . Report Top-k accuracy vs. GT pose clusters,
collision rate with object, and contact leakage that measures contacts on implausible parts.
Variant
mAP@1↑
mAP@5↑
mAP@10↑
Top-5 Acc.↑
Collision↓
Leakage↓
C
0.52 ± 0.03
0.60 ± 0.02
0.66 ± 0.02
0.41 ± 0.04
0.31 ± 0.02
0.27 ± 0.03
C+O
0.57 ± 0.03
0.63 ± 0.02
0.69 ± 0.02
0.55 ± 0.03
0.26 ± 0.02
0.22 ± 0.02
C+S
0.56 ± 0.03
0.62 ± 0.03
0.68 ± 0.02
0.51 ± 0.04
0.21 ± 0.01
0.20 ± 0.02
C+O+S
0.63 ± 0.02
0.69 ± 0.02
0.76 ± 0.03
0.64 ± 0.03
0.18 ± 0.01
0.17 ± 0.01
Shuffled
0.54 ± 0.03
0.61 ± 0.02
0.66 ± 0.02
0.44 ± 0.03
0.29 ± 0.02
0.26 ± 0.02
Table 2: Downstream HOI inference results. Left: Region Retrieval (mAP@{1,5,10}); Right: Pose
Selection (Top-5 accuracy, collision rate ↓, and contact leakage ↓).
We record the results in Table 2. As results suggest, against C, C+O and C+S significantly im-
prove the metrics, and C+O+S yields further gains. Shuffled controls eliminate these improve-
ments, confirming that structured orientational and spatial affordances indeed improve performance
for affordance learning, not merely because of additional feature capacity.
Unseen Real-World Objects.
We evaluate H2OFlow on real-world point clouds captured using
a cheap depth camera on an iPhone, collected by the RealityKit and subsampled via FPS Qi et al.
(2017), in Figure 5b. Due to training-time perturbation and occlusion, H2OFlow does not require
full object scan and is robust to real-world occlusions (e.g.bottom). H2OFlow produces highly plau-
sible affordance scores on these real inputs, effectively capturing meaningful interaction patterns
—particularly the orientational tendencies around the head region. For example, we observe that
clean, multi-modal affordances are inferred in the backpack examples (different parts). While the
objects were unseen during training, H2OFlow learns local geometric cues via dense diffused flows
instead of memorizing global mesh templates. Thus, the output affordances are semantically mean-
ingful and consistent with the actual usage of the interacted parts on the objects. In contrast, as
the full comparison shows in Figure 7, COMA relies on 2D renderings from clean meshes, and
thus struggles with noisy, reconstructed meshes derived from point clouds. This limitation severely
degrades COMA’s performance, resulting in oversimplified and unimodal affordance score maps.
6
CONCLUSION
We introduced H2OFlow, a novel framework for learning comprehensive 3D affordances from syn-
thetic data using dense diffused flows. H2OFlow demonstrates strong generalization to unseen ob-
jects and is capable of capturing diverse contact, orientational, and spatial relationships underlying
human-object interactions. Looking forward, we aim to extend this framework to support more fine-
grained interaction tasks and downstream applications such as robot policy learning. In particular,
incorporating more diverse interaction data and exploring robot-human affordance correspondence
will be key directions for future research.
7
ETHICS STATEMENT
We take ethics very seriously and our research conforms to the ICLR Code of Ethics. Affordance
learning is a well-established research area, and this paper inherits all the impacts of the research
area, including potential for dual use of the technology in both civilian and military applications.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
We believe that the work does not impose a high risk for misuse. Furthermore, the paper does not
involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects.
8
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Our paper makes use of publicly available open-source datasets, ensuring that the data required for
reproducing our results is accessible to all researchers. We have thoroughly documented all aspects
of our model’s training, including the architecture, hyperparameters, optimizer settings, learning rate
schedules, and any other implementation details for achieving the reported results. Additionally, we
specify the hardware and software configurations used for our experiments to facilitate replication.
We anticipate that it should not be challenging for other researchers to reproduce the results and
findings presented in this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially funded by ONR RAPID Program and by Carlone’s NSF CAREER Award.
REFERENCES
Joao Pedro Ara´ujo, Jiaman Li, Karthik Vetrivel, Rishi Agarwal, Jiajun Wu, Deepak Gopinath, Alexan-
der William Clegg, and Karen Liu. Circle: Capture in rich contextual environments. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 21211–21221, 2023.
Shikhar Bahl, Abhinav Gupta, and Deepak Pathak. Human-to-robot imitation in the wild. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.09450, 2022.
Shikhar Bahl, Russell Mendonca, Lili Chen, Unnat Jain, and Deepak Pathak. Affordances from human videos
as a versatile representation for robotics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13778–13790, 2023.
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Xianghui Xie, Ilya A Petrov, Cristian Sminchisescu, Christian Theobalt, and Gerard
Pons-Moll. Behave: Dataset and method for tracking human object interactions. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15935–15946, 2022.
Samarth Brahmbhatt, Cusuh Ham, Charles C Kemp, and James Hays. Contactdb: Analyzing and predicting
grasp contact via thermal imaging. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 8709–8719, 2019a.
Samarth Brahmbhatt, Ankur Handa, James Hays, and Dieter Fox. Contactgrasp: Functional multi-finger grasp
synthesis from contact.
In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 2386–2393. IEEE, 2019b.
Samarth Brahmbhatt, Chengcheng Tang, Christopher D Twigg, Charles C Kemp, and James Hays. Contactpose:
A dataset of grasps with object contact and hand pose. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIII 16, pp. 361–378. Springer, 2020.
Eric Cai, Octavian Donca, Ben Eisner, and David Held. Non-rigid relative placement through 3d dense diffu-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19247, 2024.
Joya Chen, Difei Gao, Kevin Qinghong Lin, and Mike Zheng Shou. Affordance grounding from demonstra-
tion video to target image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 6799–6808, 2023.
Hengshuo Chu, Xiang Deng, Xiaoyang Chen, Yinchuan Li, Jianye Hao, and Liqiang Nie. 3d-affordancellm:
Harnessing large language models for open-vocabulary affordance detection in 3d worlds. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.20041, 2025.
Alp´ar Cseke, Shashank Tripathi, Sai Kumar Dwivedi, Arjun S Lakshmipathy, Agniv Chatterjee, Michael J
Black, and Dimitrios Tzionas. Pico: Reconstructing 3d people in contact with objects. In Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 1783–1794, 2025.
Alexandros Delitzas, Ayca Takmaz, Federico Tombari, Robert Sumner, Marc Pollefeys, and Francis Engel-
mann. Scenefun3d: fine-grained functionality and affordance understanding in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14531–14542, 2024.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Christian Diller and Angela Dai. Cg-hoi: Contact-guided 3d human-object interaction generation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19888–19901, 2024.
Thanh-Toan Do, Anh Nguyen, and Ian Reid. Affordancenet: An end-to-end deep learning approach for object
affordance detection. In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 5882–
5889. IEEE, 2018.
Ben Eisner, Harry Zhang, and David Held. Flowbot3d: Learning 3d articulation flow to manipulate articulated
objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04382, 2022.
James J Gibson. The theory of affordances:(1979). In The people, place, and space reader, pp. 56–60. Rout-
ledge, 2014.
Sookwan Han and Hanbyul Joo. Chorus: Learning canonicalized 3d human-object spatial relations from un-
bounded synthesized images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pp. 15835–15846, 2023.
Mohamed Hassan, Vasileios Choutas, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Resolving 3d human pose am-
biguities with 3d scene constraints. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, pp. 2282–2292, 2019.
Mohamed Hassan, Partha Ghosh, Joachim Tesch, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Populating 3d
scenes by learning human-scene interaction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14708–14718, 2021.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Conf. on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Yining Hong, Haoyu Zhen, Peihao Chen, Shuhong Zheng, Yilun Du, Zhenfang Chen, and Chuang Gan. 3d-llm:
Injecting the 3d world into large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
20482–20494, 2023.
Zhi Hou, Baosheng Yu, Yu Qiao, Xiaojiang Peng, and Dacheng Tao. Affordance transfer learning for human-
object interaction detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 495–504, 2021.
Ruizhen Hu, Wenchao Li, Oliver Van Kaick, Ariel Shamir, Hao Zhang, and Hui Huang. Learning to predict
part mobility from a single static snapshot. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG), 36(6):1–13, 2017.
Chun-Hao P Huang, Hongwei Yi, Markus H¨oschle, Matvey Safroshkin, Tsvetelina Alexiadis, Senya Po-
likovsky, Daniel Scharstein, and Michael J Black. Capturing and inferring dense full-body human-scene
contact. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
13274–13285, 2022.
Juntao Jian, Xiuping Liu, Manyi Li, Ruizhen Hu, and Jian Liu. Affordpose: A large-scale dataset of hand-object
interactions with affordance-driven hand pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pp. 14713–14724, 2023.
Yuheng Jiang, Suyi Jiang, Guoxing Sun, Zhuo Su, Kaiwen Guo, Minye Wu, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Neural-
hofusion: Neural volumetric rendering under human-object interactions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6155–6165, 2022.
Hyeonwoo Kim, Sookwan Han, Patrick Kwon, and Hanbyul Joo. Beyond the contact: Discovering comprehen-
sive affordance for 3d objects from pre-trained 2d diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 400–419. Springer, 2024.
Jiye Lee and Hanbyul Joo. Locomotion-action-manipulation: Synthesizing human-scene interactions in com-
plex 3d environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
9663–9674, 2023.
Gen Li, Varun Jampani, Deqing Sun, and Laura Sevilla-Lara. Locate: Localize and transfer object parts for
weakly supervised affordance grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10922–10931, 2023a.
Jiaman Li, Jiajun Wu, and C Karen Liu. Object motion guided human motion synthesis. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 42(6):1–11, 2023b.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jiaman Li, Alexander Clegg, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Jiajun Wu, Xavier Puig, and C Karen Liu. Controllable
human-object interaction synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 54–72. Springer,
2024a.
Lei Li and Angela Dai. Hoi-page: Zero-shot human-object interaction generation with part affordance guid-
ance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07209, 2025.
Yishu Li, Wen Hui Leng, Yiming Fang, Ben Eisner, and David Held. Flowbothd: History-aware diffuser
handling ambiguities in articulated objects manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07078, 2024b.
Liangsheng Lu, Wei Zhai, Hongchen Luo, Yu Kang, and Yang Cao. Phrase-based affordance detection via
cyclic bilateral interaction. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 4(5):1186–1198, 2022.
George Kiyohiro Nakayama, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Jiahui Huang, Shi-Min Hu, Ke Li, and Leonidas Guibas.
Difffacto: Controllable part-based 3d point cloud generation with cross diffusion. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14257–14267, 2023.
Toan Nguyen, Minh Nhat Vu, Baoru Huang, Tuan Van Vo, Vy Truong, Ngan Le, Thieu Vo, Bac Le, and Anh
Nguyen. Language-conditioned affordance-pose detection in 3d point clouds. In 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3071–3078. IEEE, 2024.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Inter-
national conference on machine learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Chuer Pan, Brian Okorn, Harry Zhang, Ben Eisner, and David Held.
Tax-pose: Task-specific cross-pose
estimation for robot manipulation. pp. 1783–1792. PMLR, 2023.
William Peebles and Saining Xie.
Scalable diffusion models with transformers.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Xiaogang Peng, Yiming Xie, Zizhao Wu, Varun Jampani, Deqing Sun, and Huaizu Jiang. Hoi-diff: Text-driven
synthesis of 3d human-object interactions using diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06553, 2023.
Ilya A Petrov, Riccardo Marin, Julian Chibane, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Object pop-up: Can we infer 3d objects
and their poses from human interactions alone? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4726–4736, 2023.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning
on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Debaditya Roy and Basura Fernando. Action anticipation using pairwise human-object interactions and trans-
formers. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 30:8116–8129, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning
using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Intl. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
Denoising diffusion implicit models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Michael J Swain and Dana H Ballard. Color indexing. International journal of computer vision, 7(1):11–32,
1991.
Omid Taheri, Nima Ghorbani, Michael J Black, and Dimitrios Tzionas. Grab: A dataset of whole-body human
grasping of objects. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August
23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 581–600. Springer, 2020.
Shashank Tripathi, Agniv Chatterjee, Jean-Claude Passy, Hongwei Yi, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black.
Deco: Dense estimation of 3d human-scene contact in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8001–8013, 2023.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Jingbo Wang, Yu Rong, Jingyuan Liu, Sijie Yan, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Towards diverse and natural scene-
aware 3d human motion synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 20460–20469, 2022a.
Zan Wang, Yixin Chen, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, Wei Liang, and Siyuan Huang.
Humanise: Language-
conditioned human motion generation in 3d scenes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:14959–14971, 2022b.
Zeqi Xiao, Tai Wang, Jingbo Wang, Jinkun Cao, Wenwei Zhang, Bo Dai, Dahua Lin, and Jiangmiao Pang.
Unified human-scene interaction via prompted chain-of-contacts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07918, 2023.
Mengda Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Yinghao Xu, Cheng Chi, Gordon Wetzstein, Manuela Veloso, and Shuran Song.
Flow as the cross-domain manipulation interface, Oct 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
15208.
Yuhang Yang, Wei Zhai, Hongchen Luo, Yang Cao, Jiebo Luo, and Zheng-Jun Zha. Grounding 3d object
affordance from 2d interactions in images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 10905–10915, 2023.
Yufei Ye, Xueting Li, Abhinav Gupta, Shalini De Mello, Stan Birchfield, Jiaming Song, Shubham Tulsiani, and
Sifei Liu. Affordance diffusion: Synthesizing hand-object interactions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22479–22489, 2023.
Harry Zhang, Ben Eisner, and David Held. Flowbot++: Learning generalized articulated objects manipulation
via articulation projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12893, 2023.
Jinlu Zhang, Yixin Chen, Zan Wang, Jie Yang, Yizhou Wang, and Siyuan Huang. Interactanything: Zero-shot
human object interaction synthesis via llm feedback and object affordance parsing. In Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 7015–7025, 2025.
Xiaohan Zhang, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Sebastian Starke, Vladimir Guzov, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Couch:
Towards controllable human-chair interactions. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 518–535.
Springer, 2022.
Yang Zheng, Yanchao Yang, Kaichun Mo, Jiaman Li, Tao Yu, Yebin Liu, C Karen Liu, and Leonidas J Guibas.
Gimo: Gaze-informed human motion prediction in context. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 676–694. Springer, 2022.
Keyang Zhou, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Jan Eric Lenssen, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Toch: Spatio-temporal object
correspondence to hand for motion refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07982, 2022.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
PROMPTING THE 3D GENERATIVE MODEL
To prompt the 3D generative model CHOIS Li et al. (2024a), we follow standard practices docu-
mented in Li et al. (2024a), where the model first randomly generates a series of waypoints for the
human to follow and we prompt HOI generation using suggested prompts from Li et al. (2024a).
We list some examples below in Table 3.
Raw Prompt
Normalized Prompt
Facing the back of the chair,
lift the chair and then place
the chair onto the floor.
Facing the back of the chair, lift the chair, move the
chair, and then place the chair on the floor.
Lift and move the chair.
Lift the chair, move the chair, and put down the
chair.
Grab the top of the chair,
swing the chair.
Grab the top of the chair, swing the chair, and put
down the chair.
Lift the chair over your head,
walk and place the chair onto
the floor.
Lift the chair over your head, walk and then place
the chair on the floor.
Put your hand on the back of
the chair at the top.
Pull on
it to move it across the floor.
Put your hand on the back of the chair, pull the
chair, and set it back down.
Lift the chair, rotate the
chair and set it back down.
Lift the chair, rotate the chair, and set it back down.
Use the foot to scoot the chair
to change its orientation.
Use the foot to scoot the chair to change its orien-
tation.
Push the chair, then turn
yourself around so you can then
drag the chair behind you.
Push the chair, release the hands, then drag the
chair, and set it back down.
Hold the chair and turn it
around to face a diffferent
orientation.
Hold the chair and turn it around to face a different
orientation.
Grab one of the chair’s legs
and tilt it at an angle.
Grab the chair’s legs, tilt the chair.
Kick the chair across the room.
Kick the chair, and set it back down.
Lift the chair, flip it upside
down and place it on top of the
table.
Lift the chair, flip it upside down and place it on
top of the table.
Move the chair upside down from
the table to the floor.
Move the chair upside down from the table to the
floor.
Lift the chair, flip it upside
down and place it on top of the
table.
And then move the chair
upside down from the table to
the floor.
Lift the chair, flip it upside down and place it on
top of the table. And then move the chair upside
down from the table to the floor.
Lift and move the chair.
Then
kick the chair to move.
Lift the chair, move the chair, then kick the chair
to move, and set it back down.
Table 3: Examples of raw and normalized action prompts used in CHOIS.
B
ZERO-POSE HUMAN CONFIGURATION
We center the zero-pose human and the object into the same canonical frame. Specifically, we
subtract the centroid of the object point cloud from both the object and the human point cloud.
To make sure the model is rotation-equivariant, we apply random perturbations to the object point
cloud during training data generation. In this way, the zero-shape human will be agnostic to the
object location and rotation during inference. Note that in Figure 6, we move the human point cloud
to the side for better visibility. In reality, the object and zero-pose human will overlap.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
DENSE FLOWS GROUND TRUTH
FPS 
Subsampling
GT Flows 
Calculation
Figure 6: Dense flow training data generation visualization. Given a pair of HOI mesh generated
from CHOIS, we first subsample the mesh vertices into point clouds using furthest point sampling
(FPS) Qi et al. (2017). We then calculate the ground truth dense flows using Equation (1).
As shown in Figure 6, the ground-truth dense flows are calculated as the per-point displacement from
a zero-pose SMPL model to the ground-truth HOI sample human, both of which are subsampled
using the same set of indices.
D
DATASET DETAILS
H2OFlow trains on OMOMO objects Li et al. (2023b), where the training set comprises 12 object
categories while the testing dataset has 5 object categories. For each object in the training dataset,
we generate 100 HOI sequences, where each sequence has 200 frames.
E
HYPERPARAMETERS AND TRAINING DETAILS
We document the choice of hyperparmeters used in H2OFlow. For training the diffusion model, we
use a learning rate of 1e-4, a weight decay of 1e-5, a batch size of 32, and a training epochs number
of 20,000. Both human and object point clouds are downsampled to 512 points via FPS. During
training, we apply random rotation to the objects and random occlusion as augmentation in order to
ensure robustness to real-world variability. The model is trained with the AdamW optimizer, and the
total number of steps is set to T = 100 in the diffusion process. Following Cai et al. (2024); Nichol
& Dhariwal (2021), we use 128 as the hidden size per DiT block. We have 4 heads per block and 5
blocks in total.
In the inference of comprehensive affordances, we use a temperature hyperparameter of τ = 20 for
contact affordance cij. For orientational affordance, we use a variance of σ2 = 1 and a temperature
hyperparameter of τ = 10.
During training and testing, we center the object coordinates and produce ground-truth in object
frame (i.e., the object is always upright).
F
DIFFUSION MODEL DETAILS
We parameterize the reverse process as: pθ(F t−1 | F t) = N(F t−1; µθ(F t), Σθ(F t)), where
the mean µθ and variance Σθ are derived from a predicted noise term ϵθ(F t, H0, O, t) and an
interpolation vector vθ(F t, H0, O, t). Following Nichol & Dhariwal (2021), the interpolation
vector contains one value per dimension and is used to parameterize the covariance: Σθ(F t) =
exp

vθ log βt + (1 −v) log 1−¯αt−1
1−¯α βt

. We supervise the model using the hybrid loss from Nichol
& Dhariwal (2021) that combines the regular noise loss with a new cumulative KL-divergence loss
using the derived Σθ(F t).
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
G
COMPARISON WITH COMA
G.1
METHODOLOGY
We emphasize that H2OFlow is fundamentally different from COMA as H2OFlow introduces four
technical advances over COMA.
First, more generalizability and flexibility. Most fundamentally, COMA directly uses reconstructed
3D inputs and has no learned components in their pipeline. While COMA lays out comprehensive
affordances in a nice way, the lack of learning-based methods lacks its generalizability and flexibility
when it comes to unseen objects (as we noted in the quantitative results of the paper).
Second, a point-cloud-based affordance learning paradigm with dense diffused flows as an effective
intermediate representation. In COMA, affordances are inferred from reconstructed meshes instead
of learned flow representations, which lack the generalizability to real-world visual inputs. More-
over, COMA’s per-vertex-pair affordance calculation between meshes consumes a lot more memory
and time than H2OFlow’s sparser per-point-pair formulation. In H2OFlow, with flows, no water-
tight meshes or surface normals are needed, which tend to be noisy in real-worldscenarios . This is
supported by results in Table 1 and Table 4, where COMA struggles to generalize to unseen objects
and reconstructed meshes from noisy point clouds while H2OFlow performs well in both cases.
Third, diffusion-based multi-modal dense-flow predictor based on per-point encoding. This learning
paradigm handles intrinsic ambiguity due to multi-modality and also learns to reason about geomet-
ric information on different regions (local information) of the object-human interaction. With dense
diffused flows, H2OFlow’s pipeline provides a new method for modeling human pose with a more
flexible representation. At the same time, this representation sidesteps the need of normal vectors
from meshes (Equation (5), Equation (6)), which are costly to compute for real-world applications,
while achieving better results.
Lastly, cross-attention aggregation & partial-scan robustness. We improve the affordance aggrega-
tion via learned cross-attention weights (see ablations in Table 1). During training, we apply random
rotation to the objects and random occlusion as augmentation in order to ensure robustness to real-
world variability, which ensures the robustness to occlusion in the real world, as opposed to COMA
that requires a clean mesh of the object.
G.2
REAL-WORLD RESULTS
In Figure 7, we show comparisons with COMA on real-world unseen objects. COMA relies on 2D
renderings from clean meshes, and thus struggles with noisy, reconstructed meshes derived from
point clouds. This limitation severely degrades COMA’s performance, resulting in oversimplified
and unimodal affordance score maps.
H
MORE QUALITATIVE RESULTS ON OMOMO DATASET
In Figure 8, we provide more examples. Specifically, in the monitor example, the selected bottom
(orange) point makes more contact with the side of the body while the center (blue) point makes
frequent contact with the whole torso, which reflects real-world contact tendency when moving a
monitor. For the tripod, human legs tend to exhibit a more uniform orientation relative to the bottom
of the tripod (orange) than their hands, while the orientation of the hands relative to the top part of the
tripod (blue) is more uniform. For spatial affordance, we can see the high-level human occupancy
around the object during HOIs: the high-probability regions are more frequently occupied by the
human body parts, consistent with real-world interactions (in some cases, full human silhouettes are
observed).
I
RESULTS ON BEHAVE DATASET
We also test our method on BEHAVE dataset. To test the generalizability of H2OFlow, we provide a
baseline version by testing on BEHAVE objects directly without fine-tuning (H2OFlow-NoFT). We
also have another baseline that was finetuned on the BEHAVE objects (H2OFlow-FT). The results
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Object
Point Cloud
H2OFlow Contact H2OFlow Orientation
COMA Contact
COMA Orientation
Figure 7: Comparison with COMA on real point clouds.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Objects
Predicted HOIs
Object Contacts
Human Contacts
Orientational
Spatial
Figure 8: Visualizations of the affordances inferred from dense diffused flows prediction. H2OFlow
infers diverse affordance distributions from predicted HOI samples on unseen objects.
Baseline
SIM-H ↑
SIM-O ↑
MAE-H ↓
MAE-O ↓
Precision@K ↑
MSE↓
COMA
52.8 ± 1.5%
70.6 ± 1.1%
0.13 ± 0.04
0.03 ± 0.01
72.4 ± 5.1%
0.13 ± 0.05
COMA-Recon
42.5 ± 3.2%
55.8 ± 1.7%
0.22 ± 0.10
0.11 ± 0.15
42.4 ± 2.2%
0.36 ± 0.21
H2OFlow-NoFT
55.3 ± 3.6%
71.2 ± 1.4%
0.13 ± 0.03
0.03 ± 0.01
72.2 ± 1.2%
0.14 ± 0.02
H2OFlow-FT
74.4 ± 1.2%
80.1 ± 1.8%
0.10 ± 0.03
0.02 ± 0.01
79.1 ± 5.2%
0.11 ± 0.02
Table 4: Quantitative comparisons with various baselines on BEHAVE dataset. Note that -H and -O
represent human and object contact results.
are shown in Table 4. Without any fine-tuning, H2OFlow performed comparably with COMA’s
full-mesh version. After fine-tuning on the BEHAVE dataset, H2OFlow’s performance exceeded
COMA’s by a noticeable margin.
J
COMPARISONS WITH OTHER CONTACT-ONLY BASELINES
While few other methods focused on comprehensive affordances, we provide more comparisons
with other contact-affordance-only baselines in Table 5. Specifically, we compare with IAGNet Yang
et al. (2023) and DECO Tripathi et al. (2023) which respectively only measure contact affordances
for human and object on BEHAVE test images.
K
ABLATION ON OCCLUSION
Random masking during training lets the model accept incomplete scans. In Table 1 and Table 4,
we also see that COMA struggles with outputting high-quality affordances on reconstructed meshes
from partially observed point clouds, while H2OFlow is agnostic to occlusion due to training-time
augmentation. New experiments also support the fact that H2OFlow is robust to out-of-distribution
occlusion due to the random masking introduced in training. In Table 6, we evaluate H2OFlow’s
sensitivity to occlusion on test objects and show that the performance loss due to occlusion and
partial observability is minimal, indicating robustness to commodity depth cameras or monocular
depth-completion pipelines.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Baseline
SIM-H ↑
SIM-O ↑
MAE-H ↓
MAE-O ↓
IAGNet
-
64.34 ± 1.2%
-
0.03 ± 0.01
DECO
23.18 ± 2.1%
-
0.23 ± 0.07
-
COMA
52.8 ± 1.5%
70.6 ± 1.1%
0.13 ± 0.04
0.03 ± 0.01
COMA-Recon
42.5 ± 3.2%
55.8 ± 1.7%
0.22 ± 0.10
0.11 ± 0.15
H2OFlow-NoFT
55.3 ± 3.6%
71.2 ± 1.4%
0.13 ± 0.03
0.03 ± 0.01
H2OFlow-FT
74.4 ± 1.2%
80.1 ± 1.8%
0.10 ± 0.03
0.02 ± 0.01
Table 5: Quantitative comparisons of contact affordances only with various baselines on BEHAVE
dataset. Note that -H and -O represent human and object contact results.
Baseline
SIM-H↑
SIM-O↑
MAE-H↓
MAE-O↓
Precision@K↑
MAE↓
No Occl.
72.3%
81.0%
0.11
0.07
75.6%
0.12
10% Occl.
72.3%
80.8%
0.12
0.07
75.5%
0.12
30% Occl.
71.2%
80.7%
0.12
0.08
75.3%
0.13
50% Occl.
70.9%
79.5%
0.13
0.08
74.2%
0.13
Table 6: Performance under different occlusion levels.
L
FLOW PREDICTION DESIGN CHOICE
An interesting question is why we learn to predict dense flows instead of SMPL parameters? We
answer the question below.
Local-geometry awareness. A flow vector originates at every human vertex and therefore directly
observes local object geometry; SMPL pose parameters do not. This makes flows more suitable for
fine-grained, multimodal affordances.
Lower computational cost. Flow prediction needs only the object cloud and a canonical human
point cloud; SMPL-parameter regression would additionally require reconstructing the human and
sampling vertices — a separate task. Moreover, for orientational affordance, normal directions
would have been required if we directly learned SMPL without the intermediate dense flow repre-
sentation. As pointed out in COMA, this is the bottleneck for computation.
Multi-modality. Flows allow the diffusion model to sample multiple valid endpoints (left-/right-
hand grasp, frontal/back sitting). We conducted a smaller-scale experiment, where we learn a direct
SMPL predictor using diffusion conditioned on the object input. For affordance scores, direct SMPL
regression does not support cross-attention weights as no per-point human information was learned
during learning, so weighting is not available in aggregation here.
Performance. Results in Table 1 suggest that the direct SMPL formulation tends to perform a lot
worse. One potential reason is that human pose parameter, especially rotation, is a lot harder to
learn. Previous work Eisner et al. (2022); Pan et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024b);
Cai et al. (2024) on dense-flow learning designed flows to sidestep the rotation learning issue.
M
MEMORY AND RUNTIME COMPARISONS
H2OFlow, on average, utilizes 8416 ± 513 MB of GPU memory and 7619 ± 882 MB of CPU mem-
ory. On a single V100 GPU, it takes H2OFlow 6.7 ± 1.2 seconds to infer affordances for an unseen
point cloud. In contrast, our experiments with COMA indicate that it takes 9771±1190 MB of GPU
memory and 15812±2314 MB of CPU memory. On a single V100 GPU, it takes COMA 65.2±2.1
seconds to infer affordances for an unseen object. When given a point cloud, the time spent on cre-
ating a watertight mesh for COMA becomes the bottleneck. This is expected, as COMA analyzes
per-pair mesh vertex normal directions and requires extensive inpainting operations. H2OFlow by-
passes the large memory consumption by predicting point clouds directly.
N
APPLICATIONS TO OTHER DOMAINS VIA DENSE OPTIMIZATION
We discuss two potential use cases of the learned diffused flows and affordance scores.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
N.1
RECONSTRUCTING FULL SMPL PARAMETERS FROM DENSE DIFFUSED FLOWS
One straightforward application is to reconstruct the full human SMPL parameters from the point
cloud generated from the learned diffused flows model. Specifically, we are able to recover the full
SMPL pose and shape parameters via the following optimization problem:
ˆθ, ˆβ, ˆR, ˆt = arg
min
θ, β, R, t L(θ, β, R, t)
with
L =
X
i∈S
∥R vi(θ, β) + t −h ∗
i ∥2
2
|
{z
}
vertices-reconstruction error
+ λθ ∥θ∥2
2 + λβ ∥β∥2
2,
(10)
where S is the set of sampled vertices from the dense diffused flow model vi(θ, β) is the vertex
location from using the SMPL parameters. ∥θ∥and ∥β∥act as priors because the data term alone is
under-constrained when only a sparse subset of vertices are seen. Using dense diffused flow alone,
we are able to reconstruct the full SMPL mesh. This again illustrates that the flows are an implicit
form of affordance.
N.2
CROSS-EMBODIMENT RECONSTRUCTION
Another interesting aspect of the affordance scores is to reconstruct different embodiments based
on the predicted human point cloud. For example, suppose we are able to obtain dense cross-
embodiment correspondence between a robot point rk to human point hi, then we are able to recon-
struct the full robot configuration based on the reconstructed HOI samples and affordance scores.
Specifically, we are given a set of pre-computed human–object scores

chum
ij
, Rhum
ij
	
that capture
the contact and orientational affordances between human surface points hi and object points oj.
Our goal is to find a robot configuration that reproduces these scores as faithfully as possible.
First, we define the following parameters:
• Φ ∈Rpr — joint-space parameters that generate nominal robot surface points {rk(Φ)}Nr
k=1
through FK function.
• (R, t) — a global rigid transform (R ∈SO(3) and t ∈R3) that aligns the robot to the human
coordinate frame; the aligned points are r′
k(Φ, R, t) = R rk(Φ) + t.
• Crobot — the feasible set defined by the robot’s joint limits, self-collision constraints, and
object-penetration avoidance.
Robot-object contact score.
For each robot point k and object point j we define
ckj(Φ, R, t) = exp
 −∥r′
k(Φ, R, t) −oj∥/ τ

.
(11)
The score increases as the Euclidean distance between the aligned robot point and the object point
decreases.
Robot-object orientational score.
Let f i be the dense diffused flow attached to human point hi.
We first form a unit direction vector
xkj(Φ, R, t) =
(r′
k(Φ, R, t) −oj) × f i
∥(r′
k(Φ, R, t) −oj) × f i∥,
(12)
where the cross product couples the displacement r′
k −oj with the flow f i. We discretize the unit
sphere S2 into nb cells with representative normals {nn}nb
n=1 and compute the probability that xkj
falls into cell n:
px,kj(n; Φ, R, t) ∝exp

−∥xkj(Φ, R, t) −nn∥2/ 2σ2
.
(13)
The orientation score is then the negative Shannon entropy
Rkj(Φ, R, t) = −
nb
X
n=1
px,kj(n; Φ, R, t) log px,kj(n; Φ, R, t).
(14)
A low entropy indicates a strongly preferred orientation and hence a large Rkj.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Cross-embodiment matching loss.
We force the robot scores to agree with the human scores
using a weighted squared loss
L(Φ, R, t) =
Nr
X
k=1
Nh
X
i=1
Mki
No
X
j=1
h ckj(Φ, R, t) −chum
ij
2
+ λ
 Rkj(Φ, R, t) −Rhum
ij
2i
.
(15)
The correspondence weight Mki transfers each human score (i, j) to its associated robot point k.
Optimization problem.
Our final objective is to minimize the loss (15) subject to the kinematic
constraints:
min
Φ∈Crobot,
R∈SO(3), t∈R3
L(Φ, R, t)
(16)
Solving (16) yields a robot pose (Φ⋆, R⋆, t⋆) whose contact and orientational affordance fields best
imitate those observed for the human demonstrator, while remaining physically feasible for the
robot.
O
REAL-WORLD QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
We design a set of experiments to quantitatively assess H2OFlow’s performance on real-world ob-
jects. While real-world ground truth is not available, we devise two complementary lines of met-
rics to compare baseline performance. We select six real-world objects that have similar simulated
counterparts in the OMOMO and BEHAVE datasets. Each real object point cloud is aligned to a
canonical object frame using ICP with its closest simulated counterpart.
We report two types of quantitative metrics: (1) SMPL-based metrics, which compare recon-
structed goal human poses against CHOIS-generated synthetic human-object interactions, and (2)
affordance-based metrics, which estimate relative plausibility and spatial consistency of predicted
affordances. Since affordance ground truth is not available in real-world data, these are used only as
complementary evidence.
Given a real object O, we sample N goal human configurations from H2OFlow and reconstruct
corresponding SMPL poses SH2O = {S(n)
H2O}N
n=1 using the optimization defined in Eq.10. For the
COMA baseline, we use N generated SMPLs inferred from multi-view 2D renderings of the same
object. We collect M reference SMPL poses from CHOIS on a geometrically similar simulated
object, denoted SCHOIS = {S(m)
CHOIS}M
m=1. All SMPLs are centered in the object coordinate frame
with pelvis translation removed.
O.1
DEFINING METRICS FOR REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS
We compute three set-to-set distances between generated and reference SMPL sets. First, Minimum
Matching Distance (MMD) measures the average minimum per-sample joint distances d(S, S′) =
1
J
PJ
j=1∥Jj(S) −Jj(S′)∥2.
MMD(S, Sref) = 1
|S|
X
S∈S
min
S′∈Sref d(S, S′),
(17)
Next, Coverage measures the percentage of candidate set that covers the modes of reference set:
COVε = |{S′ ∈Sref : ∃S ∈S, d(S, S′)≤ε}|
|Sref|
,
(18)
Lastly, Frechet Pose Distance (FPD) measures the distributional similarity between the prediction
sets:
FPD = ∥µc −µr∥2
2 + Tr(Σc + Σr −2(Σ1/2
c
ΣrΣ1/2
c
)1/2),
(19)
where Jj(S) denotes the 3D joint positions of pose S, and (µc, Σc), (µr, Σr) are the means and
covariances of joint vectors from the candidate and reference sets, respectively. Lower MMD and
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Method
MMD ↓
COV@15cm (%) ↑
FPD ↓
SIM-H (%) ↑
MAE-H↓
Precision@K (%)↑
MSE ↓
COMA
12.8
43.2
61.5
49.7
0.23
40.9
0.21
H2OFlow
8.9
64.5
47.8
68.6
0.13
71.3
0.13
H2OFlow (None)
10.6
58.9
50.6
65.4
0.16
67.2
0.16
H2OFlow (Light)
9.2
63.1
48.6
68.0
0.14
70.8
0.14
H2OFlow (Medium)
8.9
64.5
47.8
68.6
0.13
71.3
0.13
H2OFlow (Aggressive)
9.9
60.2
49.5
65.9
0.15
68.1
0.17
Table 7: Quantitative comparison of SMPL-based distances between real-world predictions and
CHOIS reference poses. Lower MMD/FPD and higher Coverage indicate better alignment with
synthetic interaction distributions. “Light/Medium/Aggressive” correspond to the presets in Sec-
tion O.2.
FPD and higher COVε indicate closer alignment between predicted and synthetic interaction distri-
butions.
We additionally report similarity between predicted contact and spatial occupancy distributions de-
rived from real scans and the corresponding simulated object using the same metrics used in simu-
lated experiments. These metrics capture how well the learned affordance distributions transfer to
real geometry.
Across six real-world objects, H2OFlow achieves significantly lower MMD/FPD and higher cover-
age than COMA, confirming its ability to generalize to real-world objects without manual labeling.
O.2
ROBUSTNESS TO NOISE LEVEL
Our real-world captures undergo post-processing, which can yield relatively clean point clouds. To
quantify robustness, we test H2OFlow on noisy single-object point clouds and define a reproducible
denoising pipeline with controllable strength. We assume single, segmented object point clouds,
captured via a commodity RGB-D camera (in our case, an iPhone camera).
We adopt a standard point-cloud pipeline available in Open3D Library. Each stage and its control
parameter is listed so denoising strength is explicit and reproducible.
1. Statistical Outlier Removal (SOR): statistical outlier removal(nb neighbors =
k, std ratio = r), which removes isolated points whose mean neighbor distance exceeds r
standard deviations. Controls: k (neighbors), r (aggressiveness).
2. Radius
Outlier
Removal
(ROR):
radius outlier removal(nb points
=
m, radius = R), which prunes sparse regions lacking m neighbors within radius R.
Controls: m, R (m).
We then apply FPS to the cleaned point clouds, yielding a denoised, subsampled result. We define
four presets that sweep aggressiveness:
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Preset
k
r
m
R
Visualization
None
–
–
–
–
Light
20
2.0
8
0.01
Medium
30
1.5
12
0.012
Aggressive
50
1.0
16
0.015
In our evaluation, we use the same H2OFlow weights across all conditions. For each object, we use
RealityKit to collect raw noisy scan, denoised with None/Light/Medium/Aggressive. We use the
same real-world objects in Section O.1 with the same real-world evaluation protocols.
H2OFlow, by default, uses the medium denoising setting.
As shown in Table 7, it is point-
cloud–native and remains stable under Light and Medium denoising. By contrast, the Aggressive
preset can over-prune thin structures (e.g., handles, rims), degrading affordance performance near
those parts and increasing collisions during pose selection. We also observe that the drop of perfor-
mance is not substantial: although both None and Aggressive settings reduce performance relative
to Light/Medium, they still outperform the COMA baseline, underscoring the effectiveness of flows
as the intermediate representation.
P
SCALABILITY
P.1
SCALING VIA DATA AUGMENTATION
For objects like chairs, the dominant affordance is often hips-on-seat (sitting) rather than hand-
mediated manipulation. Because our training set is synthesized from CHOIS (object motion–guided
interactions), it over-represents moving/lifting patterns. Fortunately, H2OFlow’s training recipe is
model-agnostic and point-cloud–centric, so we can expand the HOI source models to better cover
everyday usage (sit, lean, rest, place, open/close) and retrain the same dense-flow learner.
We augment the synthetic HOI pool with recent 3D HOI generation models that explicitly produce
usage-centric human–object interactions such as InteractAnything Zhang et al. (2025), HOI-PAGE
Li & Dai (2025), and PICO Cseke et al. (2025). All generators are standardized by our existing pre-
processing: mesh →FPS subsampling →paired point clouds, identical to our current pipeline. No
watertight meshes or normals are required downstream. By adding more training data, we effec-
tively expand the actions used: sit on, perch, lean back, rest arm, place on seat, kneel, step onto, lie
on... We assemble a balanced mixture of manipulation and usage episodes per category and filter
collisions or self-penetrations. We keep the same object splits (train/test categories) as in the main
paper. We retrain the same DiT flow model with identical losses/hyperparameters; only the HOI
source distribution changes. Dense diffused flows remain the intermediate representation, preserv-
ing compatibility with our affordance inference.
As the chair example (same real-world chair from Figure 5) shows in Figure 9, without training data
augmentation from Zhang et al. (2025), the contact affordance mostly concentrates on the hands
areas with limited contact in the hip area due to the fact that most chair interactions from CHOIS
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Point Cloud
Contact
Orientation
Contact
Orientation
Spatial
Spatial
Before Augmentation
After Augmentation
Figure 9: Comparison of the three affordance representations before and after dataset augmentation
with usage data. After augmentation, we observe more symmetry and meaningful interaction pat-
terns that reflect actual object usage (e.g., hip-on-seat).
data are moving the chair. Similarly, for orientation, not much trend is seen in the hip area and
for spatial affordance, the occupancy is concentrated at the back of the chair, indicating how a
human moves the chair. While the above predictions are valid for moving the chair, more expressive
affordances that indicate sitting on the chair are more informative. Augmented with synthetic data
generated from Zhang et al. (2025), we have more HOI meshes representing sitting on the chair in
the training dataset. Thus, the flow predictor will learn to predict both moving and using the chair.
After this augmentation, we see a bi-modal concentration of contact affordance in both hands and hip
areas, indicating the model now learns to output contact based on actual usage. For the orientation
affordance, we now see better symmetry as well as concentrated orientational pattern in the legs
area. Lastly, for the spatial affordance, the front side of the chair is now more frequently occupied.
Because H2OFlow learns from point-cloud flows rather than annotation-heavy labels or normals,
broadening generators directly broadens learned usage affordances (e.g., hips-on-seat) without ar-
chitectural change.
P.2
PROMPT-CONDITIONED DENSE DIFFUSED FLOWS
Beyond dataset diversification, we can condition the dense-flow generator on a textual intent (“sit
on the chair”). This steers sampling toward usage-consistent interactions (seat occupancy, torso
orientation) at test time, even for unseen objects, while keeping H2OFlow’s point-based formulation
intact.
Let t be a tokenized prompt. We encode text with a frozen CLIP text encoder Radford et al. (2021)
Etext(t) ∈RL×d. We then condition the DiT backbone used for dense-flow denoising with cross-
attention adapters: in each DiT block, after self-attention on the joint human-flow tokens (as in the
main model), add a cross-attention from human-flow tokens to text tokens. Object tokens remain as
in the main model (object→human cross-attention). We also retain the same noise-prediction targets
and hybrid diffusion loss as our current DiT.
As standard in conditional diffusion Ho & Salimans (2022), we drop text with probability pdrop dur-
ing training and learn unconditional/conditional branches jointly. At inference, we sample flows
with guidance scale γ: ˆϵθ = (1 + γ) ϵθ(Ft | O, t, ∅) −γ ϵθ(Ft | O, t, Etext(t)).
During training , we attach short textual prompts to each synthetic HOI episode and automatically
normalize existing action descriptions into concise templates (e.g., “sit on chair”, “lean back on
backrest”), preserving the same category splits. At test time, language steers the sampled human
goal configurations H = H0 + F ; our affordance inference (contact cij, orientational Rij, spatial
Sij) remains unchanged.
In terms of implementation, the change is minimal, as only a few pieces in the DiT are changed.
c l a s s
DiTBlock ( nn . Module ) :
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads :
super ( ) .
i n i t
( )
s e l f . s e l f a t t n
= SA( h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads )
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n o
= CA( h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads )
s e l f . mlp = Mlp ( h i d d e n s i z e ,
i n t ( h i d d e n s i z e
*
4 ) )
# adaLN−Zero
modulation
#
o u t p u t s
s h i f t s / s c a l e s / gates
f o r
3 submodules = 9 chunks
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
s e l f . adaLN = nn . S e q u e n t i a l (
nn . SiLU ( ) ,
nn . Linear ( h i d d e n s i z e ,
9 *
h i d d e n s i z e ,
b i a s =True )
)
def
forward ( s e l f ,
x hf ,
y obj ,
cond ,
x pos=None ,
y pos=None ) :
( sh msa ,
sc msa ,
gt msa ,
sh mo ,
sc mo ,
gt mo ,
sh mlp ,
sc mlp ,
gt mlp ) =
s e l f . adaLN ( cond ) . chunk (9 ,
dim =1)
x = modulate ( s e l f . norm msa ( x hf ) ,
sh msa ,
sc msa )
x = x + gt msa . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . s e l f a t t n (
query=x ,
key=x ,
value =x ,
r o t a r y p e =( x pos ,
x pos )
) [ 0 ]
x o = modulate ( s e l f . norm mca o ( x ) ,
sh mo ,
sc mo )
x = x + gt mo . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n o (
query=x o ,
key=y obj ,
value =y obj ,
r o t a r y p e =( x pos ,
y pos )
) [ 0 ]
x f f = modulate ( s e l f . norm mlp ( x ) ,
sh mlp ,
sc mlp )
x = x + gt mlp . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . mlp ( x f f )
return x
Figure 10: Original H2OFlow’s DiT Block Implementation in PyTorch
c l a s s
DiTBlockText ( nn . Module ) :
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads ) :
super ( ) .
i n i t
( )
s e l f . s e l f a t t n
= SA( h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads )
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n o
= CA( h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads )
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n t
= CA( h i d d e n s i z e ,
num heads )
s e l f . mlp = Mlp ( h i d d e n s i z e ,
i n t ( h i d d e n s i z e
*
4 ) )
# adaLN−Zero
modulation
#
o u t p u t s
s h i f t s / s c a l e s / gates
f o r
4 submodules = 12 chunks
s e l f . adaLN = nn . S e q u e n t i a l (
nn . SiLU ( ) ,
nn . Linear ( h i d d e n s i z e ,
12 *
h i d d e n s i z e ,
b i a s =True )
)
def
forward ( s e l f ,
x hf ,
y obj ,
z t x t ,
cond ,
x pos ,
y pos ,
z pos ) :
( sh msa ,
sc msa ,
gt msa ,
sh mo ,
sc mo ,
gt mo ,
sh mt ,
sc mt ,
gt mt ,
sh mlp ,
sc mlp ,
gt mlp ) =
s e l f . adaLN ( cond ) . chunk (12 , dim =1)
x = modulate ( s e l f . norm msa ( x hf ) ,
sh msa ,
sc msa )
x = x + gt msa . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . s e l f a t t n (
query=x ,
key=x ,
value =x ,
r o t a r y p e =( x pos ,
x pos )
) [ 0 ]
x o = modulate ( s e l f . norm mca o ( x ) ,
sh mo ,
sc mo )
x = x + gt mo . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n o (
query=x o ,
key=y obj ,
value =y obj ,
r o t a r y p e =( x pos ,
y pos )
) [ 0 ]
x t = modulate ( s e l f . norm mca t ( x ) ,
sh mt ,
sc mt )
x = x + gt mt . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . c r o s s a t t n t (
query=x t ,
key= z t x t ,
value = z t x t ,
r o t a r y p e =( x pos ,
z pos )
) [ 0 ]
x f f = modulate ( s e l f . norm mlp ( x ) ,
sh mlp ,
sc mlp )
x = x + gt mlp . unsqueeze ( 1 )
*
s e l f . mlp ( x f f )
return x
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Point Cloud
Contact
Orientation
Contact
Orientation
Spatial
Spatial
“Sit on the chair”
“Move the chair”
Figure 12: Chair example of prompt-conditioned H2OFlow
Figure 11: Prompt-Conditioned H2OFlow’s DiT Block Implementation in PyTorch
As shown in the implementation of Figure 10 and Figure 11, with minimal changes to the DiT block
architecture, we are able to condition the output flows on the tokenized prompts. In Figure 12, we
use the same example as above but test it on the text-conditioned H2OFlow. As one can observe,
with the prompt conditioning, the two different usages of the chair yield really different affordances.
The contact now is not bimodal between hands and hips and is now concentrated on one body part
based on the usage. Similarly, for the orientation affordance, we observe high concentration on hips
when sitting and on arms when moving. More interestingly, we see a sitting silhouette for sitting
and a standing silhouette for moving.
Thus, a small, modular text head yields promptable dense flows that align with language-specified
affordances, while preserving the core point-cloud training and inference of H2OFlow.
Q
LIMITATIONS
While H2OFlow learns comprehensive affordances from synthetic data and generalizes to unseen
objects’ noisy point clouds, it has a few limitations. First, the underlying generative model does
not have a sufficiently large variety of objects–more fine-grained interactions on smaller, articulated
objects are not captured. While H2OFlow can learn from arbitrary HOI samples, there are limited
foundation models and datasets on such fine-grained HOI tasks. Second, H2OFlow could be ex-
tended to physical robots, by warmstarting the manipulation policies based on the affordance score
while constructing a correspondence map between human point clouds and robot points. We leave
this extension to future work.
R
LLM USAGE
We primarily used LLMs to check grammar and spelling. We also used LLMs for formatting tables
and figures.
27