--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
USE THE ONLINE NETWORK IF YOU CAN: TOWARDS
FAST AND STABLE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Ahmed Hendawy1,2,∗Henrik Metternich1
Th´eo Vincent1,3
Mahdi Kallel5
Jan Peters1,2,3,4
Carlo D’Eramo5
1Technical University of Darmstadt
2Hessian.AI
3German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
4Robotics Institute Germany (RIG)
5University of W¨urzburg
ABSTRACT
The use of target networks is a popular approach for estimating value functions in
deep Reinforcement Learning (RL). While effective, the target network remains a
compromise solution that preserves stability at the cost of slowly moving targets,
thus delaying learning. Conversely, using the online network as a bootstrapped tar-
get is intuitively appealing, albeit well-known to lead to unstable learning. In this
work, we aim to obtain the best out of both worlds by introducing a novel update
rule that computes the target using the MINimum estimate between the Target
and Online network, giving rise to our method, MINTO. Through this simple, yet
effective modification, we show that MINTO enables faster and stable value func-
tion learning, by mitigating the potential overestimation bias of using the online
network for bootstrapping. Notably, MINTO can be seamlessly integrated into a
wide range of value-based and actor-critic algorithms with a negligible cost. We
evaluate MINTO extensively across diverse benchmarks, spanning online and of-
fline RL, as well as discrete and continuous action spaces. Across all benchmarks,
MINTO consistently improves performance, demonstrating its broad applicability
and effectiveness.
1
INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated exceptional performance and achieved major break-
throughs across a diverse spectrum of decision-making challenges. This success spans domains
from mastering complex environments like video games (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Hessel et al.,
2018) and strategic board games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), to solving high-dimensional problems
in continuous control (Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Schulman et al., 2017). Noteworthy applications in-
clude learning complex locomotion skills (Haarnoja et al., 2018b; Rudin et al., 2022) and enabling
sophisticated, real-world capabilities such as robotic manipulation (Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Lu
et al., 2025).The foundation of this success lies primarily in Deep RL, initiated by the introduction
of the Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013), which marked the first successful application of
deep neural networks in RL. To make that happen, Mnih et al. (2013) introduce various techniques
to mitigate mainly the deadly triad issue (Sutton et al., 1998; Van Hasselt et al., 2018) due to the
usage of function approximators, off-policy data, and target bootstrapping. Particularly, Mnih et al.
(2013) introduce the concept of target networks to mitigate the negative impact of the deadly triad
issue (Zhang et al., 2021), where the regression target is computed using a lagged copy of the online
network to promote stability during training. This prevents the online network from directly chasing
its own rapidly changing estimates, thereby mitigating the problem of moving targets. A problem
that presents an obstacle towards using fresh estimates from the online network. While the target
network has been highly successful in improving stability and convergence, it inherently slows down
learning since updates are based on delayed targets. This naturally raises an important question: how
can we accelerate learning by leveraging the most recent online estimates while still preserving the
stability of the training process?
∗Ahmed Hendawy (ahmed.hendawy@tu-darmstadt.de) is the corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/AhmedMagdyHendawy/MINTO.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Recent studies have suggested that relying solely on the online network for target bootstrapping
can improve performance in certain methods (Bhatt et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2019; Kapturowski
et al., 2023). Surprisingly, later findings indicate that reinstating a target network in these same
approaches can further enhance results (Palenicek et al., 2026; 2025; Gan et al., 2021). Building
on these insights, we propose a complementary perspective: leveraging both the online and target
networks jointly to compute the regression target, thereby aiming to combine the benefits of stability
and fast learning. In deep RL, the problem of moving targets is especially evident due to the use
of neural networks and the resulting uncontrolled fluctuations in the values of unseen states. This
issue becomes even more critical in value-based methods, where overestimation bias drives the
online estimates to steadily increase over time. These issues motivate the search for an appropriate
selection criterion that can mitigate the impact of overestimation bias when employing the online
network for target computation, hence faster, yet stable learning.
Building on this motivation, we propose MINTO, a simple yet effective technique that computes re-
gression targets by taking the MINimum estimated value between the Target and Online networks.
By relying on the target network when the online estimate is relatively higher, MINTO reduces over-
estimation bias, alleviates the moving-target problem, and ensures stable learning. At the same time,
by incorporating the online network when its estimate is lower, MINTO leverages fresher informa-
tion, enabling faster learning. Thanks to its simplicity, MINTO can be seamlessly integrated into a
wide range of off-policy methods, including both value-based and actor–critic algorithms, across on-
line and offline RL settings. In this work, we present an extensive empirical evaluation showcasing
the benefits of our approach. In addition, we benchmark MINTO against related baselines that ex-
ploit online estimates, whether for similar objectives or for different purposes. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows: we advocate for a principled combination of online and target networks
when computing bootstrapped targets, enabling faster learning while preserving stability. We intro-
duce MINTO, a technique that is simple in design yet effective in practice, that computes regression
targets as the minimum between online and target estimates, thereby mitigating the moving-target
problem and reducing overestimation bias. We further demonstrate MINTO’s broad applicability
and effectiveness by integrating it into both value-based and actor–critic methods, across online and
offline RL settings. Extensive empirical results show that MINTO consistently outperforms conven-
tional target-network designs and related baselines.
2
RELATED WORK
Many works focus on developing simpler RL algorithms that are closer to the original Q-learning
algorithm to benefit from up-to-date Bellman updates. A reasonable approach is to use additional
resources or privileged information to remove the target network. For example, Gallici et al. (2025)
demonstrated that cleverly using parallel environments mitigates the need for a target network. How-
ever, real-world applications are often limited to a single process. Interestingly, Lindstr¨om et al.
(2025) show that constructing the regression target from the online network alone is stable after
a pre-training phase using expert data. While this study gives hope that a target-free algorithm is
feasible, it still relies on additional resources that are not available in the general case. Shao et al.
(2022) introduce a cross-entropy method to refine the actions suggested by the policy to construct
the bootstrapped estimate. While promising, this technique is limited to the actor-critic setting, and
requires additional resources to optimize the landscape defined by the Q-function. In this work, we
do not consider having access to additional resources or privileged information as we are interested
in building a general-purpose algorithm for off-policy learning.
Another approach is to rely on a single estimator, thereby reducing the number of parameters used
during training. For example, Kim et al. (2019) replace the maximum operator with the MellowMax
operator to construct a target-free algorithm. However, a following work (Gan et al., 2021) suggests
that reintroducing the target network is beneficial, indicating that the improvements made by the first
approach come from the different nature of the update instead of up-to-date bootstrapped estimates.
This makes MellowMax mostly orthogonal to our approach. Kapturowski et al. (2023) explore
incorporating recent online estimates through a trust region around the target-network values, yet
their method is a comprehensive algorithm with multiple interacting components contributing to
performance. Some works intervene in the architecture of the function approximator to stabilize
the training dynamics when using only one estimator. For example, Li & Pathak (2021) design
neural networks processing the state given as input in the Fourier space. Nonetheless, their anal-
ysis shows that the approach struggles to handle high-dimensional input spaces. More recently,
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Bhatt et al. (2024) introduce CrossQ, an actor-critic algorithm that uses batch normalization (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) to account for the distribution match between the state-action pair and the next
state-next action pair. A follow-up work demonstrates that this idea can work better with a target net-
work (Palenicek et al., 2025), moving away from the objective of constructing the regression target
from up-to-date estimates, and making this method orthogonal to our approach. In the following, we
also choose to rely on a target network since Vincent et al. (2026) show that target-free methods still
underperform compared to target-based methods. Closer to our approach are the hybrid methods
where the regression target is built from the online network, but an old copy of the online network
is used to regularize the update. Zhu & Rigotti (2021) introduce Self-correcting Q-learning (ScQL),
which evaluates the Q-estimate of the next state at the action that maximizes a combination of the
target and online network. Pich´e et al. (2023) regularize the online network predictions with the
prediction given by the target network. In Section 5.1, we compare MINTO to those methods.
Building the regression target from the online network accelerates the overestimation bias, which
degrades performance. The overestimation bias is a long-standing problem in off-policy RL (Has-
selt, 2010), which arises from the interaction between the maximum operator and the stochastic
nature of the bootstrap estimate. A first attempt to combat this issue is to learn two independent
estimates of the Q-function and evaluate one Q-estimate on the best action suggested by the other
estimator to build the regression target (Hasselt, 2010). While this idea is scalable to deep set-
tings (Van Hasselt et al., 2016), it leads to underestimation, which hinders exploration. The Clipped
Double Q-Learning (CDQ) trick, proposed by Fujimoto et al. (2018), is an effective technique for
alleviating overestimation bias by taking the minimum between two critic networks. CDQ remains
widely used in modern off-policy actor–critic algorithms (Haarnoja et al., 2018b; Lee et al., 2024;
2025; Palenicek et al., 2025) and has inspired several related approaches. For instance, Maxmin
Q-learning (Lan et al., 2020) reduces overestimation bias by taking the minimum across several
estimators before applying the Bellman maximization operator, but at the cost of training multiple
networks. In contrast, our method applies the minimum operator between the target and online
network, incorporating the latest online estimates in a stable manner to achieve faster learning.
3
PRELIMINARIES
We
define
the
problem
as
a
Markov
Decision
Process
(MDP)
(Puterman,
1990),
<
S, A, P, r, µ, γ >, where S is the state space, A is the action space, P : S ×A →∆(S) is the transi-
tion distribution where P(s′|s, a) is the probability of reaching state s′ from state s after performing
action a, r : S×A →∆(R) is the reward distribution, µ is the initial state distribution, and γ ∈[0, 1)
is a discount factor. A policy π : S →∆(A) maps each state to a distribution over the action space.
The policy induces an action-value function Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at)|s0 = s, a0 = a] that
defines the expected discounted cumulative return of executing action a in state s while following
the policy π thereafter. The goal of the agent is to find the policy π that maximizes the expected
return starting from some initial state. TD learning methods are a suitable set of solutions to this
goal, more precisely Q-Learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992). Q-Learning is an off-policy algorithm
that aims to learn the state-action value function Q, known as the Q-function, of the optimal policy
π∗, Qπ∗= Q∗, by utilizing the Bellman optimality equation (Bellman, 1957):
Q∗(s, a) = E[r(s, a) + γ max
a′∈A Q∗(s′, a′)].
(1)
Therefore, the optimal policy is defined using this value function by acting greedily at a given state
s, π∗= argmaxa∈AQ∗(s, a). Q-learning offers a recursive update to approximate the state-action
value function Q∗, given a transition sample (s, a, r, s′) generated by any behavioral policy:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α(s, a)[y −Q(s, a)],
(2)
where y = r + γ maxa′∈A Q(s′, a′) is the target value which is computed via bootstrapping with
the current estimate, and α(s, a) is the step-size. In the target value, the maximum expected value of
the next state is approximated by applying maximum operator on a single estimate. This introduces
a maximization bias and causes Q-learning to overestimate the state-action values (Hasselt, 2010).
When dealing with high dimensional state and action spaces, the tabular form of the value functions
is not suitable and function approximators are needed. Particularly, in Deep RL, the state-action
value function is modeled by a neural network Qθ(s, a) with some learnable parameters θ. In Mnih
et al. (2013), DQN was introduced as the first successful application of neural networks in RL.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Mnih et al. (2013) introduce a series of algorithmic components, most notably the introduction of
the target network. Target networks Q¯θ allow a stable learning of value functions by computing
the target value using an older copy of the online network Qθ, y = r + γ maxa′∈A Q¯θ(s, a). This
is done by periodically updating the target parameters ¯θ to the online parameters θ every T steps.
Hence preventing the chase of a moving target due to learning Qθ from its own value that eventually
results in unstable learning. Despite the success, this results in a slow learning of the value function
as well as the policy due to relying on out-dated estimates. This raises a question: can we find a
practical Bellman update rule that results in a stable and fast learning?
4
METHODOLOGY
4.1
MINTO
The aim of this paper is to identify a suitable criterion for incorporating recent online estimates
without sacrificing the stability traditionally provided by the target network. This naturally suggests
that the online and target networks should work side by side to achieve both fast and stable learning.
To this end, we propose a lightweight and effective technique that leverages online estimates only
when they are unlikely to introduce harmful overestimation or rapid fluctuations in the target. In
cases where the online estimates are higher than the target one, we instead rely on the target network
to ensure stability. Concretely, we achieve this by applying the MINimum operator to the estimated
values of the Target and Online networks, giving rise to our method, MINTO.
Following our method, the bootstrapped target can be computed as follows:
y = r + γ max
a′∈A min
 Q¯θ(s′, a′), Qθ(s′, a′)

.
(3)
Given the new regression target, we can compute the regression loss, similar in DQN, as follows:
L(θ) = 1
2
 ⌈y⌉−Qθ(s, a)
2,
(4)
where ⌈.⌉refers to the stop gradient operator, to prevent the backpropagation of gradients to the
online network presented in the regression target equation (Eq. 3).
In practice, MINTO can be integrated into DQN and, more generally, into any algorithm that relies
on temporal-difference learning (see Appendix B), by modifying only a few lines of code. The
method is lightweight, requiring only a single additional feedforward pass of the online network on
the next state. When implemented in an efficient deep learning framework such as JAX (Bradbury
et al., 2018), this overhead is negligible.
4.2
ANALYZING MINTO
25
50
75
100
125
in % of DQN
Online Only
Target Only
Max
Mean
Random
Min (ours)
Area Under the Curve
Figure 1: Results of benchmarking the Minimum
operator utilized by MINTO against other poten-
tial operators on 15 Atari games with the CNN ar-
chitecture. We report the AUC metric using IQM
and the confidence interval computed across 5
seeds. Methods are trained for 50 million frames.
To evaluate the impact of MINTO, we design an
empirical study that seeks to answer two cen-
tral questions: (Q1) Is the minimum operator
an appropriate criterion for combining online
and target estimates? (Q2) Can the empirical
evidence substantiate the rationale for adopt-
ing the minimum operator? We empirically ex-
amine how the minimum operator employed in
MINTO stands relative to alternative operators
for combining online and target network esti-
mates. Our evaluation is conducted on 15 Atari
games and considers the following baselines:
Online Only, which relies exclusively on the
online estimates during training; Target Only,
equivalent to DQN using solely the target net-
work estimates; Max, which selects the larger
of the two estimates; Mean, which averages
them; Random, which chooses between the on-
line and target networks with equal probability;
and finally Min, the operator at the core of our proposed method, MINTO.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
100
110
120
130
in % of DQN
DQN
MINTO
DQN
MINTO
CNN
IMPALA
Area Under the Curve
1
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0
1
2
IQM Return
Performance Curve (CNN)
1
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
Performance Curve (IMPALA)
DQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 2: Results of benchmarking MINTO and DQN on 15 Atari games with CNN, and IMPALA
with LayerNorm (LN) architectures. All results are reported using IQM and confidence interval on
5 seeds and over all games. Left: We report the AUC metric for MINTO and DQN while utilizing
both architectures. Center and Right: We illustrate the performance learning curves of MINTO and
DQN under both architecture options.
In Fig. 1, we clearly observe the advantage of the minimum operator over the alternative candidates,
thereby addressing Q1. As expected, the Online Only function performs poorly, as it relies on
rapidly changing bootstrapped targets that lead to unstable training dynamics (see Fig. 33). On the
other hand, the Random function fails to match the performance of MINTO, instead converging
toward the behavior of Target Only (DQN). The Mean function also aligns closely with Target Only,
without offering any additional benefit. Interestingly, the worst results are obtained with the Max
operator, which represents the opposite selection criterion to ours. In this case, instability arises
from severe overestimation bias, which in turn drives large and uncontrolled increases in target
values. Taken together, these findings support our motivation for adopting the minimum operator: it
enables the inclusion of recent online estimates in a stable manner by mitigating the overestimation
bias they may introduce, thus providing an empirical answer to Q2.
4.3
CONVERGENCE OF MINTO
While our empirical study highlights the effectiveness of the minimum operator, it is equally impor-
tant to establish whether its use is theoretically justified in terms of convergence. Since analyzing
convergence under function approximation is notoriously difficult, we focus on the tabular setting.
Our analysis leverages the Generalized Q-learning framework of Lan et al. (2020), which guarantees
convergence for update operators satisfying specific non-expansion properties. Owing to its close
relation to Maxmin Q-learning, we show that MINTO can be cast as a special case of this general
framework, in the same spirit as how it has been used to analyze other Q-learning variants in their
work. This observation leads directly to the following corollary.
Corollary 1 (Convergence of MINTO). Let the MINTO operator be defined as GMINTO(Qs) =
maxa∈A minj∈T Qsa(j), where T is a set of historical time indices. Under the standard stochastic
approximation assumptions for the learning rate (Assumption 2 in Lan et al. (2020)), the Q-values
generated by the MINTO update rule converge to the optimal action-values, Q∗.
Proof. The proof relies on demonstrating that the GMINTO operator satisfies the two conditions on
the target operator G (Assumption 1 in Lan et al. (2020)). We provide the detailed verification of
these conditions in Appendix A.
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We now turn to the empirical evaluation, where we demonstrate MINTO’s broad applicability and
effectiveness by integrating it into both value-based and actor–critic methods across online and
offline RL settings, and show consistent advantages over conventional target-network designs and
related baselines.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5.1
ONLINE RL AND DISCRETE CONTROL
We evaluate MINTO on a benchmark of 15 Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013) recommended
by Graesser et al. (2022). These games are chosen for their diversity in human-normalized scores
achieved by DQN after training. All methods employ the standard CNN architecture introduced by
Mnih et al. (2015), and our experiments follow the evaluation protocol of Machado et al. (2018) us-
ing the official Dopamine hyperparameters (Castro et al., 2018). Additional implementation details
and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C.1.
We begin by evaluating the performance gains of MINTO over DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) in terms of
both sample efficiency and asymptotic performance. Our objective is to demonstrate that MINTO
not only accelerates learning by incorporating fresher estimates from the online network but also
achieves higher final performance. To capture both aspects in a single measure, we report the Area
Under the Curve (AUC) metric, alongside learning curves for MINTO and DQN. To further assess
the method’s effectiveness with more advanced architectures, we extend the comparison to the IM-
PALA architecture (Espeholt et al., 2018; Castro et al., 2018), evaluating the same metrics. In this
setting, we additionally apply LayerNorm (LN), motivated by prior work showing its potential for
improving learning stability and performance (Lee et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024; Gallici et al.,
2025; Vincent et al., 2026).
In Fig. 2, we observe a clear advantage of MINTO over DQN. Specifically, MINTO achieves an
improvement of approximately 17% in AUC when using the vanilla CNN architecture, and about
22% when employing IMPALA with LN. The performance curves in Fig. 2 (center and right)
further illustrate MINTO’s superior sample efficiency and higher asymptotic performance. These
results suggest that incorporating more recent estimates from the online network accelerates learning
while also improving final performance.
100
110
120
in % of DQN
DQN
Double DQN
FR-DQN
ScDQN
Maxmin DQN
MINTO
Area Under the Curve
Figure 3:
Results of benchmarking MINTO
against related baselines on 15 Atari games with
the CNN architecture. We report the AUC metric
using IQM and the confidence interval computed
across 5 seeds.
The idea of leveraging the online network
alongside the target network for computing re-
gression targets is not confined to MINTO.
Prior work has explored alternative ways of uti-
lizing the online network for different purposes.
It is therefore important to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of our selection criterion, the minimum
operator, against established methods from the
literature.
In this study, we compare against
three representative baselines: Double DQN
(Van Hasselt et al., 2016), Functional Regular-
ization DQN (FR-DQN) (Pich´e et al., 2023),
and Self-correcting DQN (ScDQN) (Zhu &
Rigotti, 2021). All methods are implemented
with the CNN architecture, and we report ag-
gregate results over all 15 games using the AUC
metric.
In Fig. 3, we observe that MINTO
consistently outperforms all baselines, includ-
ing methods such as Double DQN and ScDQN
that are specifically designed to mitigate overestimation. This indicates that combining the online
network with the minimum operator provides an especially effective mechanism for addressing this
issue. Furthermore, MINTO achieves clear gains over FR-DQN, which relies entirely on the online
network for target bootstrapping while regularizing its updates using a fixed network (target net-
work). This highlights the role of our selection criterion, the minimum operator, in regulating the
contribution of online estimates. It is also worth noting that methods such as ScDQN and FR-DQN
require additional hyperparameters, whereas MINTO introduces none.
Given the similarity of our method to the ensemble-based approach Maxmin DQN (Lan et al.,
2020), which also employs a minimum operator, it is essential to benchmark MINTO against this
prior work. Maxmin DQN applies the minimum operator across multiple estimates produced by
an ensemble of target networks, with the goal of reducing the overestimation bias introduced by the
maximum operator in the Bellman optimality equation. For this comparison, we also report results in
Fig. 3 using the AUC metric. Although Maxmin DQN relies on an ensemble of Q-functions (N = 2
in our study), MINTO achieves better performance. This demonstrates the advantage of leveraging
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
100
105
110
in % of IQN
IQN
IQN+
MINTO
IQN
IQN+
MINTO
CNN
IMPALA
Area Under the Curve
1
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0
2
4
6
IQM Return
Performance Curve
20
40
60
80
100
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Online Selection Ratio
Breakout
CNN
IMPALA
IQN
IQN+MINTO (ours)
Figure 4: Results of benchmarking MINTO+IQN and IQN on 15 Atari games in the online RL
setting with the CNN, and IMPALA with LayerNorm (LN) architectures. All metrics are computed
over 5 seeds. Left: We report the AUC metric computed by the IQM and its confidence interval.
Center: We demonstrate the performance learning curves of both methods in terms of IQM return
and confidence interval. Right: We report the frequency of selecting the online estimate during the
course of training on the Breakout game, considering the mean and standard deviation.
up-to-date estimates from the online network, in combination with the minimum operator, to miti-
gate overestimation bias that can arise from blindly incorporating online estimates. Simultaneously,
MINTO avoids the additional memory and compute overhead required by Maxmin DQN.
5.2
DISTRIBUTIONAL RL
We also evaluate MINTO within the context of distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017), an ad-
vanced value-based paradigm that has achieved state-of-the-art performance on the Atari bench-
mark in the online RL setting (Castro et al., 2018). Specifically, we consider Implicit Quantile
Networks (IQN) (Dabney et al., 2018), a distributional RL method that employs quantile regression
to approximate the entire return distribution rather than only its expected value. IQN accomplishes
this by learning an implicit quantile function for the state–action values. For our experiments, we
follow the implementation guidelines provided by Castro et al. (2018) when benchmarking IQN on
the Atari suite. Comprehensive implementation details and hyperparameter settings are reported in
Appendix C.2.
We evaluate the effect of integrating MINTO into IQN by modifying its target computation ac-
cording to our proposed technique. Appendix B provides further details, including pseudo-code
illustrating the changes introduced (see Alg. 2). We benchmark MINTO+IQN against the original
IQN on 15 Atari games using the CNN, and the IMPALA with LN architectures. In Fig. 4 (left),
we report the AUC metric for both methods, which captures improvements in both learning speed
and asymptotic performance. According to this metric, MINTO improves IQN by approximately
7% under the CNN architecture and by around 10% under the IMPALA with LN architecture. Fig. 4
(center) further presents the learning curves, illustrating consistent gains in sample efficiency and
final performance. While the improvement is smaller than in the DQN case (and in later cases we
consider), these results clearly demonstrate that MINTO enhances the performance of IQN, estab-
lishing it as a general and effective improvement even for state-of-the-art distributional methods.
To verify that the online network is selected frequently during training, we track the online selection
ratio and report it for a representative game, Breakout, in Fig. 4 (right). The results show that the
target network dominates in the very early stages of training, while the use of the online network
gradually increases as training progresses. Later in training, the online network is selected approx-
imately 45% of the time. Each point on the curve corresponds to the average online selection ratio
between two consecutive target network updates, during which the parameters of the online network
increasingly diverge from those of the target network.
5.3
OFFLINE RL
The applicability of our method extends beyond online RL. Given its simplicity, MINTO can be
readily incorporated into offline RL methods by modifying the Bellman update rule, allowing us to
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
100
150
200
250
in % of CQL
CQL
CQL+MINTO
CQL
CQL+MINTO
CNN
IMPALA
Area Under the Curve
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gradient Steps (× 62.5K)
0.0
0.5
1.0
IQM Return
Performance Curve (CNN)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Performance Curve (IMPALA)
CQL
CQL+MINTO (ours)
Figure 5: Results of benchmarking CQL and CQL+MINTO on 14 Atari games with CNN, and
IMPALA with LayerNorm (LN) architectures. All results are reported using IQM and confidence
interval on 5 seeds and over all games. Left: We report the AUC metric for both methods while
utilizing the two architectures. Center and Right: We illustrate the performance learning curves of
CQL and CQL+MINTO after employing both architecture options.
investigate its potential in this setting. Offline RL aims to learn an optimal policy from a static dataset
of previously collected experience, without any further interaction with the environment. A central
challenge in this paradigm is the distributional shift problem: the learned policy may query the Q-
function on state–action pairs absent from the dataset. Overestimation of these out-of-distribution
(OOD) actions can then misguide the policy toward suboptimal behaviors.
We consider a popular offline RL algorithm, Conservative Q-Learning (CQL), which regularizes
Q-function learning by penalizing OOD values while encouraging in-distribution values. To inte-
grate MINTO into this framework, we simply modify the computation of the regression target using
Eq. 3 (see Alg. 3). As in the online setting, we use the hyperparameters from Castro et al. (2018).
Additional implementation details and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C.3.
In Fig. 5, we present the results of evaluating our method, denoted as CQL+MINTO, against the
original CQL on 14 Atari games using both the vanilla CNN architecture and the IMPALA archi-
tecture with LN. For the offline setting, we use the datasets provided by Gulcehre et al. (2020).
We note that one game, Tutankham, is excluded from our evaluation since it is not available in the
released dataset.
100
150
200
250
300
in % of CQL
CQL
Double CQL
FR-CQL
ScCQL
CQL+MINTO
Maxmin CQL
Maxmin CQL+MINTO
N=1
N=2
Area Under the Curve
Figure 6:
Results of benchmarking MINTO
against related baselines on 14 Atari games in the
offline RL setting using the CNN architecture. We
report the AUC metric using IQM and the confi-
dence interval computed across 5 seeds.
The results of our experiments demonstrate a
clear benefit of applying MINTO to offline RL.
MINTO consistently improves the performance
of CQL in terms of both sample efficiency and
final performance, as reflected in the AUC met-
ric (see Fig. 5 (left)) and the learning curves
(see Fig. 5 (center and right)). In particular,
MINTO tremendously boosts the performance
of CQL with a CNN architecture by roughly
125% in AUC. Although the performance gain
is smaller with the IMPALA with LN archi-
tecture, MINTO still improves CQL by around
20%, with a clearer sample-efficiency advan-
tage visible in Fig. 5 (right). The improvements
are substantial, highlighting the central role of
recent online estimates, an aspect overlooked
by the original CQL formulation, as well as the
effectiveness of the minimum operator in mit-
igating the overestimation introduced by these
estimates.
Building on our comparison in Fig. 3, we adapt the online RL baselines to the offline RL setting
by using CQL as the underlying RL algorithm. This integration is straightforward due to the close
relation between CQL and DQN. As shown in Fig. 6, MINTO consistently outperforms all baselines
that rely on a single estimator (N = 1), mirroring our observations in the online RL setting. How-
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
IQM Norm Return
MuJoCo (5 Tasks)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
HBench (14 Tasks)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
250
500
750
DMC-Hard (7 Tasks)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.25
0.50
0.75
IQM Norm Return
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
250
500
750
SimbaV1
SimbaV2
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 7: Results of evaluating the impact of MINTO on SimbaV2 (top) and SimbaV1 (bottom)
on three continuous control benchmarks: MuJoCo (left), HBench (center), and DMC-Hard (right).
We show the performance curves of all methods on each benchmark while reporting a normalized
IQM return and confidence interval computed on 10 seeds.
ever, unlike in the online setting, Maxmin CQL, which employs two estimators (N = 2), achieves
notably higher performance than MINTO. We attribute this to the conservative nature of Maxmin
CQL, whose cautious updates are less detrimental in the offline scenario compared to the online
case where exploration plays a major role. This observation motivates us to investigate whether
introducing fresh estimates through MINTO into such a strong baseline can yield further gains.
By incorporating recent online estimates into the target computation, we find that MINTO indeed
enhances the performance of Maxmin CQL, as illustrated in Fig. 6.
5.4
ONLINE RL AND CONTINUOUS CONTROL
Similarly, MINTO is not restricted to value-based methods. In off-policy actor–critic algorithms,
where a dedicated network models the policy, and the Q-function (critic) is trained using boot-
strapped targets from a target critic network, our proposed update rule can also be applied. There
are multiple ways to incorporate MINTO into actor–critic methods, depending in particular on the
number of critic networks employed. We defer a discussion of these design choices to Appendix B.
To examine the effect of incorporating up-to-date estimates in the actor–critic setting, we adopt two
recent architectures that are used in combination with Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a), namely SimbaV1 (Lee et al., 2024) and SimbaV2 (Lee et al., 2025). SAC is a widely
used actor–critic algorithm that seeks to learn an optimal stochastic policy by encouraging explo-
ration through entropy maximization. In contrast, SimbaV1 and SimbaV2 are recently proposed
architectures designed to scale performance with model size by leveraging the concept of simplicity
bias, implemented in practice through normalization layers and residual connections. In Alg. 4, we
highlight the modifications introduced to SAC in order to integrate MINTO.
We benchmark SimbaV1 and SimbaV2 with and without our proposed method, MINTO. The eval-
uation is conducted on 26 continuous control tasks, including both manipulation and locomotion,
drawn from three different benchmarks: MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), Humanoid Bench (HBench)
(Sferrazza et al., 2024), and the DeepMind Control Suite Hard (DMC-Hard) (Tassa et al., 2018).
For each actor–critic method, we report the aggregated performance curves on all three benchmarks.
Additional details on the experimental setup and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C.4.
In Fig. 7, we observe a clear improvement in sample efficiency when applying our method on the
MuJoCo and HBench benchmarks. In contrast, performance on DMC-Hard is comparable to the
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
base algorithm (SimbaV1) or slightly lower (as with SimbaV2). Overall, however, MINTO yields a
consistent positive impact across all benchmarks and both actor–critic methods, suggesting the value
of incorporating recent online estimates when computing regression targets in continuous control
and actor–critic settings. Detailed results are in the Appendix D.6 including an additional study on
CrossQ+WN (Palenicek et al., 2025).
6
CONCLUSION
We introduce MINTO, a simple bootstrapping rule that combines online and target networks by tak-
ing their minimum estimate. This design mitigates the overestimation bias that can arise from blindly
incorporating online estimates into target computation, thereby alleviating the moving-target prob-
lem, while still exploiting recent updates for faster learning. Across online, offline, value-based, and
actor–critic methods, MINTO consistently improves sample efficiency and final performance with-
out introducing additional hyperparameters and with only negligible overhead. These results estab-
lish MINTO as a practical and effective alternative to conventional target-network designs, pointing
toward a promising direction for advancing stable and efficient deep RL. Although MINTO consis-
tently improves performance across diverse settings, there are natural trade-offs to consider. Rely-
ing exclusively on the minimum operator may, in some cases, be overly conservative in low-noise
environments, leading to slight underestimation. In addition, by dampening optimistic estimates,
MINTO may interact with exploration strategies in ways that are not yet fully understood. These
observations open promising avenues for future research, such as adaptive operator selection that
dynamically balance online and target estimates based on uncertainty or learning dynamics. Beyond
these considerations, a separate line of future work lies in testing MINTO in additional challenging
scenarios, such as multi-task and multi-agent RL, to assess its scalability and broader applicability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Daniel Palenicek and Florian Vogt for their valuable support in
conducting the study on CrossQ+WN (Palenicek et al., 2025). This work was funded by Hessian.AI
through the project ’The Third Wave of Artificial Intelligence – 3AI’ by the Ministry for Science
and Arts of the state of Hessen. This work was also funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC-3057/1
’Reasonable Artificial Intelligence’, Project No. 533677015). Calculations for this research were
conducted on the Lichtenberg high-performance computer and the Intelligent Autonomous Sys-
tems (IAS) cluster at TU Darmstadt. Furthermore, the authors gratefully acknowledge the scientific
support and HPC resources provided by the Erlangen National High Performance Computing Cen-
ter (NHR@FAU) of the Friedrich-AlexanderUniversit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg (FAU) under the NHR
project b187cb. NHR funding is provided by federal and Bavarian state authorities. NHR@FAU
hardware is partially funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) – 440719683. The au-
thors also gratefully acknowledge the ”Julia 2” HPC provided by the Julius-MaximiliansUniversity
W¨urzburg. ”Julia 2” was funded as DFG project as ”Forschungsgroßger¨at nach Art 91bGG” under
INST 93/1145-1 FUGG.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We have taken several measures to ensure the reproducibility of our results.
To further pro-
mote transparency and replication, we publicly release our code at https://github.com/
AhmedMagdyHendawy/MINTO. To illustrate the simplicity of our approach, we provide in the
appendix both a JAX code snapshot showing how MINTO can be integrated into DQN with minimal
changes to the target computation and pseudocode for all algorithms where we integrate our method.
Detailed descriptions of the experimental setup, architectures, and hyperparameters are provided in
Appendix C. For theoretical results, we clearly state assumptions and include the complete proof
of convergence in Appendix A. For empirical evaluation, we report results across multiple random
seeds, following standard evaluation protocols (Machado et al., 2018), and provide per-task break-
downs in Appendix D. Offline RL experiments use publicly available datasets (RL Unplugged),
and we specify all data processing and training procedures in the appendix. Together, these details
should facilitate exact replication and further validation of our findings.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL USAGE
A large language model was helpful in polishing writing, improving reading flow, and identifying
remaining typos.
REFERENCES
OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al.
Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
2020.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 47:
253–279, 2013.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and R´emi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1 edi-
tion, 1957.
Aditya Bhatt, Daniel Palenicek, Boris Belousov, Max Argus, Artemij Amiranashvili, Thomas Brox,
and Jan Peters. Crossq: Batch normalization in deep reinforcement learning for greater sample
efficiency and simplicity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
//github.com/jax-ml/jax.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G Belle-
mare.
Dopamine: A research framework for deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.06110, 2018.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and R´emi Munos.
Implicit quantile networks for
distributional reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1096–
1105. PMLR, 2018.
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6, 2005.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Matteo Gallici, Mattie Fellows, Benjamin Ellis, Bartomeu Pou, Ivan Masmitja, Jakob Nicolaus Fo-
erster, and Mario Martin. Simplifying deep temporal difference learning. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Yaozhong Gan, Zhe Zhang, and Xiaoyang Tan. Stabilizing q learning via soft mellowmax operator.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Laura Graesser, Utku Evci, Erich Elsen, and Pablo Samuel Castro. The state of sparse training in
deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7766–7792.
PMLR, 2022.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Thomas Paine, Sergio G´omez, Konrad Zolna,
Rishabh Agarwal, Josh S Merel, Daniel J Mankowitz, Cosmin Paduraru, et al. Rl unplugged: A
suite of benchmarks for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, 33:7248–7259, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. Pmlr, 2018a.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018b.
Hado Hasselt. Double q-learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
2018.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, 2015.
Steven Kapturowski, V´ıctor Campos, Ray Jiang, Nemanja Rakicevic, Hado van Hasselt, Charles
Blundell, and Adria Puigdomenech Badia. Human-level atari 200x faster. In The Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Seungchan Kim, Kavosh Asadi, Michael Littman, and George Konidaris. Deepmellow: removing
the need for a target network in deep q-learning. In Proceedings of the twenty eighth international
joint conference on artificial intelligence, 2019.
Qingfeng Lan, Yangchen Pan, Alona Fyshe, and Martha White. Maxmin q-learning: Controlling the
estimation bias of q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Hojoon Lee, Dongyoon Hwang, Donghu Kim, Hyunseung Kim, Jun Jet Tai, Kaushik Subramanian,
Peter R Wurman, Jaegul Choo, Peter Stone, and Takuma Seno. Simba: Simplicity bias for scaling
up parameters in deep reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
Hojoon Lee, Youngdo Lee, Takuma Seno, Donghu Kim, Peter Stone, and Jaegul Choo. Hyperspher-
ical normalization for scalable deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15280,
2025.
Alexander Li and Deepak Pathak. Functional regularization for reinforcement learning via learned
fourier features. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Alexander Lindstr¨om, Arunselvan Ramaswamy, and Karl-Johan Grinnemo. Pre-training deep q-
networks eliminates the need for target networks: An empirical study. In The 14th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods (ICPRAM), 2025.
Guanxing Lu, Wenkai Guo, Chubin Zhang, Yuheng Zhou, Haonan Jiang, Zifeng Gao, Yansong
Tang, and Ziwei Wang. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18719, 2025.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and
Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
problems for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
stra, and Martin Riedmiller.
Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Michal Nauman, Mateusz Ostaszewski, Krzysztof Jankowski, Piotr Miło´s, and Marek Cygan. Big-
ger, regularized, optimistic: scaling for compute and sample efficient continuous control. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 37:113038–113071, 2024.
Daniel Palenicek, Florian Vogt, and Jan Peters. Scaling off-policy reinforcement learning with batch
and weight normalization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
Daniel Palenicek, Florian Vogt, Joe Watson, Ingmar Posner, and Jan Peters. Xqc: Well-conditioned
optimization accelerates deep reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, 2026.
Alexandre Pich´e, Valentin Thomas, Joseph Marino, Rafael Pardinas, Gian Maria Marconi, Christo-
pher Pal, and Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan. Bridging the gap between target networks and func-
tional regularization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes. Handbooks in operations research and management
science, 2:331–434, 1990.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 91–100.
PMLR, 2022.
Patrick Schnell, Luca Guastoni, and Nils Thuerey. Temporal difference learning: Why it can be fast
and how it will be faster. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2025.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Carmelo Sferrazza, Dun-Ming Huang, Xingyu Lin, Youngwoon Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Humanoid-
bench: Simulated humanoid benchmark for whole-body locomotion and manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.10506, 2024.
Lin Shao, Yifan You, Mengyuan Yan, Shenli Yuan, Qingyun Sun, and Jeannette Bohg. Grac: Self-
guided and self-regularized actor-critic. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
2017.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT
press Cambridge, 1998.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
IEEE, 2012.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hado Van Hasselt, Yotam Doron, Florian Strub, Matteo Hessel, Nicolas Sonnerat, and Joseph Mo-
dayil. Deep reinforcement learning and the deadly triad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02648, 2018.
Th´eo Vincent, Tim Faust, Yogesh Tripathi, Jan Peters, and Carlo D’Eramo. Eau de q-network:
Adaptive distillation of neural networks in deep reinforcement learning. Reinforcement Learning
Journal, 2025a.
Th´eo Vincent, Daniel Palenicek, Boris Belousov, Jan Peters, and Carlo D’Eramo.
Iterated q-
network: Beyond one-step bellman updates in deep reinforcement learning.
Transactions on
Machine Learning Research, 2025b.
Th´eo Vincent, Yogesh Tripathi, Tim Faust, Abdullah Akg¨ul, Yaniv Oren, Mehil Kandemir, Jan
Peters, and Carlo D’Eramo. Bridging the performance gap between target-free and target-based
reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3):279–292, 1992.
Shangtong Zhang, Hengshuai Yao, and Shimon Whiteson. Breaking the deadly triad with a target
network. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12621–12631. PMLR, 2021.
Rong Zhu and Mattia Rigotti. Self-correcting q-learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 11185–11192, 2021.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
A Proof of Corollary 1
16
A.1
Proof of Condition A1.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
A.2
Proof of Condition A1.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
B
Algorithmic Details
17
C Implementation Details
20
C.1
Online RL and Discrete Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
C.2
Distributional RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.3
Offline RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
C.4
Online RL and Continuous Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D Individual Results
24
D.1
Online RL and Discrete Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.2
Maxmin DQN vs. MINTO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
D.3
Distributional RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
D.4
Offline RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
D.5
Maxmin CQL vs. MINTO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
D.6
Online RL and Continuous Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
D.7
Ablation on Target Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
E
Analysis of Value Estimation Error and Bias
46
E.1
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
E.2
Algorithms and Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
E.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
PROOF OF COROLLARY 1
To prove the convergence of MINTO, we show that its target operator, GMINTO, satisfies the two
conditions of Assumption 1 from the Generalized Q-learning framework Lan et al. (2020).
Assumption 1 (Conditions on G) Let G : Rn×N×K 7→R be the target operator where Qs =
(Qij
sa) ∈Rn×N×K, a ∈A, and |A| = n, i ∈{1, . . . N}, j ∈{0, . . . , K −1}, and s ∈S is an
arbitrary state. G must satisfy:
A1.1: If all input action-values are identical, Qij
sa = Qkl
sa, ∀i, k, ∀j, k, and ∀a, then
G(Qs) = maxa Qij
sa.
A1.2: G is a non-expansion w.r.t. the max norm, |G(Qs) −G(Q′
s)| ≤maxa,i,j |Qij
sa −Q′ij
sa|.
The action-value function Qs is represented by a tensor with an ensemble of N action-value func-
tions and for each, K historical time action-values.
The MINTO operator is defined as GMINTO(Qs) = maxa∈A (minj∈T Qsa(j)) for a given state s,
where T is a set of historical time indices, and j is the time index with an abuse of notations. This is
a special case of the Generalized Q-learning where N = 1 and K = 2, hence dropping the i index.
In the analysis, we consider a general variant of MINTO, where K > 1, by considering a set of
historical time values using the indices set T such that Qsa =
 Qsa(t −K), . . . , Qsa(t −1)

for a
given state and action. In practice, T includes only (t −1) and (t −K), representing the online and
target network estimates, respectively.
A.1
PROOF OF CONDITION A1.1
Assume the input Q-values Qsa(j) are identical for all j ∈T and all a ∈A.
GMINTO(Qs) = max
a∈A

min
j∈T Qsa(j)

= max
a∈A Qsa(j)
This is the maximum action-value among the inputs. Thus, A1.1 is satisfied.
A.2
PROOF OF CONDITION A1.2
Let Qs and Q′
s be two distinct sets of historical Q-values for a given state s, assuming that N = 1.
|GMINTO(Qs) −GMINTO(Q′
s)| =
max
a∈A

min
j∈T Qsa(j)

−max
a∈A

min
j∈T Q′
sa(j)

(5)
≤max
a∈A
min
j∈T Qsa(j) −min
j∈T Q′
sa(j)

(6)
≤max
a∈A

max
j∈T |Qsa(j) −Q′
sa(j)|

(7)
=
max
a∈A,j∈T |Qsa(j) −Q′
sa(j)|
(8)
The first inequality holds because the max operator is a non-expansion. The second inequality holds
because the min operator is also a non-expansion.
The final term is the maximum absolute difference over the subset of Q-values used by the MINTO
operator. This maximum is necessarily less than or equal to the maximum over the entire set of all
possible Q-values, i.e.:
max
a∈A,j∈T |Qsa(j) −Q′
sa(j)| ≤max
a,j |Qsa(j) −Q′
sa(j)|
Therefore, |GMINTO(Qs) −GMINTO(Q′
s)| ≤maxa,j |Qsa(j) −Q′
sa(j)|. Thus, A1.2 is satisfied.
Conclusion: Since both conditions of Assumption 1 are satisfied, the convergence of MINTO is
guaranteed by Theorem 2 of Lan et al. (2020) under the standard stochastic approximation assump-
tions for learning rate stated in Assumption 2 of Lan et al. (2020).
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
ALGORITHMIC DETAILS
The pseudocode blocks below present MINTO and its extension to IQN, CQL, and SAC in Alg. 1,
Alg. 2, Alg. 3, and Alg. 4 respectively. Changes in the pseudocode of the underlying algorithms are
colored red. Note that ⌈·⌉denotes the stop-gradient operator. For MINTO we want to explicitly stop
the gradient, as the target computation relies on both the online as well as the target parameters. In
contrast to other methods, like DoubleDQN, for example, the gradient is not stopped by the arg max
operator, as the online values are used directly.
Algorithm 1 MINTO
1: Initialize online and target paramters ¯θ, θ, an empty replay buffer B, and ttotal = 0.
2: repeat
3:
Sample an initial state s0 from µ
4:
for t = 0 to nhorizon do
5:
Sample an action at ∼ϵ-greedy(Qθ(st, ·)
6:
Execute action at in environment, observe reward rt and next state st+1
7:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in B
8:
Sample a batch of B transitions (sb, ab, rb, s′
b)B
b=1 from B
9:
Compute the TD-target yb = rb + γ maxa′ min(Q¯θ(s′
b, a′), Qθ(s′
b, a′))
10:
if s′
b is terminal then yb ←rb
11:
Compute the loss L(θ) =
1
2B
PB
b=1(⌈yb⌉−Qθ(sb, ab)
2
12:
Obtain the gradient ∇θL and perform an update step
13:
Every T steps update the target network ¯θ ←θ
14:
if st+1 is terminal break
15:
end for
16:
ttotal ←ttotal + t
17: until ttotal ≥ntotal
Algorithm 2 IQN+MINTO
1: Initialize online and target network parameters θ, ¯θ, and replay buffer B, and ttotal = 0.
2: repeat
3:
Sample initial state s0 ∼µ
4:
for t = 0 to nhorizon do
5:
Select action at ∼ϵ-greedy

1
N
PN
i=1 Zθ(st, a, τi)

where τi ∼U[0, 1]
6:
Execute at, observe reward rt and next state st+1
7:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in B
8:
Sample minibatch (sb, ab, rb, s′
b)B
b=1 from B
9:
Sample {τi}N
i=1, {τ ′
j}N′
j=1 ∼U[0, 1]
10:
Compute target quantiles:
a∗= arg max
a′ min

1
N
PN
i=1 Z¯θ(s′
b, a′, τi), 1
N
PN
i=1 Zθ(s′
b, a′, τi)

yj = rb + γ min
 Z¯θ(s′
b, a∗, τ ′
j), Zθ(s′
b, a∗, τ ′
j)

11:
if s′
b terminal then yj ←rb
12:
Compute quantile regression loss:
L(θ) =
1
NN ′B
B
X
b=1
N
X
i=1
N ′
X
j=1
ρτi
κ (⌈yj⌉−Zθ(sb, ab, τi))
13:
Perform gradient step on ∇θL
14:
Every T steps update target network ¯θ ←θ
15:
if st+1 is terminal break
16:
end for
17:
ttotal ←ttotal + t
18: until ttotal ≥ntotal
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Algorithm 3 CQL+MINTO
1: Initialize online and target critic parameters θ, ¯θ, an empty replay buffer B, and ttotal = 0.
2: Load offline dataset D into B
3: repeat
4:
Sample a batch of B transitions (sb, ab, rb, s′
b)B
b=1 from B
5:
Compute target Q-values for next states:
yb = rb + γ max
a′ min(Q¯θ(s′
b, a′), Qθ(s′
b, a′))
6:
if s′
b is terminal then yb ←rb
7:
Compute standard TD loss:
LTD(θ) =
1
2B
B
X
b=1
 ⌈yb⌉−Qθ(sb, ab)
2
8:
Compute conservative regularizer:
LCQL(θ) = α · 1
B
B
X
b=1
h
log
X
a
exp(Qθ(sb, a)) −Qθ(sb, ab)
i
9:
Total loss:
L(θ) = LTD(θ) + LCQL(θ)
10:
Update critic parameters: θ ←θ −η∇θL(θ)
11:
Every T steps update target network: ¯θ ←θ
12:
ttotal ←ttotal + 1
13: until ttotal ≥nsteps
In Alg. 4, SAC is adapted to use a single Q-function critic, following the approach taken in Simba
(Lee et al. (2024; 2025)) on many benchmarks, which also relies on a single critic. This choice
motivated our design, as it simplifies computation while remaining effective when combined with
the MINTO operator in the target computation. In practice, we also experimented with a double-
critic setup (see Fig. 18-21, 24, and 26), where we evaluate the Clipped Double Q-Learning (CDQ)
trick with and without MINTO integration of online estimates.
For MINTO integration with CDQ, we considered two variants. In the first variant (as in SimbaV1
and SimbaV2), the online estimates from both critics are aggregated to compute a single shared
target value, which is then used to update both networks. In the second variant (as in CrossQ+WN),
each critic is updated using only its corresponding online estimate when forming the target. This is
a design choice, and a more detailed investigation is left for future work.
In general, the largest performance gains were observed with the single-critic variant, since applying
the minimum operator on all online and target networks, in the CDQ case, can lead to overly con-
servative updates. Nevertheless, the performance gains remain clear after integrating MINTO into
the CDQ trick, especially as shown in Fig. 24 and 26 when using the CrossQ+WN (Palenicek et al.,
2025) algorithm. The stochastic policy and temperature updates are retained as in standard SAC.
Overall, the MINTO modifications presented in Alg. 1, 2, 3, and 4 are straightforward to implement
and can be integrated with minimal changes to the underlying algorithms. This makes MINTO a
practical approach for extending existing value-based and actor-critic methods without introducing
significant complexity.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Algorithm 4 SAC+MINTO.
1: Initialize policy parameters ϕ, critic’s online and target parameters θ, ¯θ, an empty replay buffer
B, and ttotal = 0.
2: repeat
3:
Sample an initial state s0 from µ
4:
for t = 0 to nhorizon do
5:
Sample action at ∼πϕ(·|st)
6:
Execute at in environment, observe reward rt and next state st+1
7:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in B
8:
Sample a batch of B transitions (sb, ab, rb, s′
b)B
b=1 from B
9:
Sample a′
b ∼πϕ(·|s′
b) and compute log πϕ(a′
b|s′
b)
10:
Compute target:
yb = rb + γ

min (Q¯θ(s′
b, a′
b), Qθ(s′
b, a′
b)) −α log πϕ(a′
b|s′
b)

11:
if s′
b is terminal then yb ←rb
12:
Update critic by minimizing
L(θ) =
1
2B
B
X
b=1
 ⌈yb⌉−Qθ(sb, ab)
2
13:
Update policy ϕ using gradient of
Jπ(ϕ) = 1
B
B
X
b=1
 α log πϕ(ab|sb) −Qθ(sb, ab)

14:
Optionally update temperature α by minimizing
J(α) = 1
B
B
X
b=1
−α
 log πϕ(ab|sb) + Htarget

15:
Every T steps update target critic: ¯θ ←τθ + (1 −τ)¯θ
16:
if st+1 is terminal break
17:
end for
18:
ttotal ←ttotal + t
19: until ttotal ≥ntotal
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
C.1
ONLINE RL AND DISCRETE CONTROL
For our online reinforcement learning experiments in the discrete-action setting, we use Atari envi-
ronments as the benchmark domain. The implementations of DoubleDQN, FR-DQN, ScDQN, and
MINTO share the same lightweight and reproducible framework for DQN variants written in JAX.
The codebase1 has been released. It is inspired by the code2 released by Vincent et al. (2025b). All
algorithms share the same network architectures and training setups, differing only in the algorithm-
specific modifications detailed in Tables 1 and 2. MINTO is implemented by modifying the target
computation.
Listing 1: JAX implementation of the MINTO TD target.
1
def compute_minto_target(
2
self,
3
target_params,
4
online_params,
5
sample,
6
):
7
q_online_next = self.network.apply(online_params,
,→sample.next_state)
8
q_online_next = jax.lax.stop_gradient(q_online_next)
9
q_target_next = self.network.apply(target_params,
,→sample.next_state)
10
q_next = jnp.max(jnp.minimum(q_online_next, q_target_next))
11
return (
12
sample.reward
13
+ (1 - sample.is_terminal) * (self.gamma**self.update_horizon)
,→* q_next
14
)
Hyperparameter
DQN
Maxmin DQN
MINTO
Replay Buffer Capacity
1,000,000
Batch Size
32
Update Horizon
1
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
Learning Rate
6.25 × 10−5
Horizon
27,000
Architecture Type
CNN
Features
[32, 64, 64, 512]
Epochs
100
Training Steps per Epoch
250,000
Data to Update
4
Initial Samples
20,000
Epsilon End
0.01
Epsilon Duration
250,000
Target Update Frequency (T)
8,000
Ensemble Size (N)
-
2
-
Table 1: Hyperparameter settings for DQN, Maxmin DQN, and MINTO on Atari. Most parameters
are shared, with algorithm-specific hyperparameters explicitly listed. Identical values are merged
for clarity.
1 https://github.com/AhmedMagdyHendawy/MINTO
2 https://github.com/slimRL/slimDQN
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hyperparameter
DoubleDQN
FR-DQN
ScDQN
MINTO
Replay Buffer Capacity
1,000,000
Batch Size
32
Update Horizon
1
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
Learning Rate
6.25 × 10−5
Horizon
27,000
Architecture Type
CNN
Features
[32, 64, 64, 512]
Epochs
100
Training Steps per Epoch
250,000
Data to Update
4
Initial Samples
20,000
Epsilon End
0.01
Epsilon Duration
250,000
Target Update Frequency (T)
8,000
Regularization Parameter (κ)
-
1.0
-
Self Correcting Parameter (β)
-
3.0
-
Table 2: Hyperparameter settings for the four DQN variants evaluated on Atari, including Dou-
bleDQN, FR-DQN, ScDQN, and MINTO. Most parameters are shared across all algorithms, while
the table explicitly lists the algorithm-specific hyperparameters, the regularization parameter κ for
FR-DQN and the self-correcting parameter β for ScDQN. Identical values are merged for clarity.
C.2
DISTRIBUTIONAL RL
For the distributional reinforcement learning experiments, we use Implicit Quantile Networks (IQN).
The implementation builds directly on the same JAX codebase as the DQN experiments, ensuring
consistency in architecture and training setup. The key algorithm-specific hyperparameters are listed
in Table 3.
Hyperparameter
IQN
IQN+MINTO
Replay Buffer Capacity
1,000,000
Batch Size
32
Update Horizon (n)
1
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
Learning Rate
5.0 ×10−5
Adam ϵ
3.125 ×10−4
Horizon
27,000
Architecture Type
CNN
Features
[32, 64, 64, 512]
Epochs
100
Training Steps per Epoch
250,000
Data to Update
4
Initial Samples
20,000
Epsilon End
0.01
Epsilon Duration
250,000
Target Update Frequency (T)
8000
Table 3: Comparison of IQN hyperparameters for n = 1 using IQN and IQN+MINTO. Update
horizon is set to 1.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C.3
OFFLINE RL
For the offline reinforcement learning experiments on Atari,
we use datasets from RL
Unplugged1 (Gulcehre et al., 2020), which provide standardized and diverse benchmarks. The im-
plementation is built on a stable and well-tested codebase2 to ensure reproducibility and fair com-
parison, released by Vincent et al. (2025a). The codebase has been released. All methods are run
with their default hyperparameters, and the most important settings are reported in Table 4.
Hyperparameter
CNN
IMPALA
CQL
CQL+MINTO
CQL
CQL+MINTO
Dataset Size
5,000,000
Batch Size
32
Update Horizon
1
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
Epochs
100
Learning Rate
5 × 10−5
Adam (ϵ)
5 × 3.125−4
Training Steps per Epoch
62,500
Tradeoff Factor (α)
0.1
Target Update Frequency (T)
2000
Layer Norm
no
yes
Table 4: Comparison of CQL and CQL+MINTO hyperparameters for the two different network
architectures CNN and IMPALA.
C.4
ONLINE RL AND CONTINUOUS CONTROL
For our continuous-control experiments with online reinforcement learning, we adopt SimbaV1 and
SimbaV2. The implementation is based on the official SimbaV2 codebase3 (Lee et al., 2025), ensur-
ing consistency with the original work. All experiments use the default hyperparameters provided
by the authors, with the most relevant ones summarized in Tables 5 and 6.
Hyperparameter
SimbaV1,
SimbaV1+MINTO
DMC-Hard
HumanoidBench
MuJoCo
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
0.995
Learning Rate
1.0 × 10−4
Weight Decay
0.01
Target (τ)
0.005
Update Horizon (n)
1
Temperature Initial Value
0.01
Temperature Target Entropy
−0.5 × |A|
Batch Size
256
Buffer Max Length
1,000,000
Buffer Min Length
5,000
Num Train Envs
1
Action Repeat
2
1
Max Episode Steps
1000
Table 5: Comparison of SimbaV1 hyperparameters across DMC-Hard, HumanoidBench, and Mu-
joco locomotion environments. Identical values are merged.
1 https://github.com/huihanl/rl_unplugged
2 https://github.com/slimRL/slimCQL
3 https://github.com/dojeon-ai/SimbaV2
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hyperparameter
SimbaV2,
SimbaV2+MINTO
DMC-Hard
HumanoidBench
MuJoCo
Actor Shift
3
Critic Shift
3
Critic vmax
5.0
Critic vmin
−5.0
Critic Num Bins
101
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
0.995
Learning Rate Init
1.0 × 10−4
Learning Rate End
5.0 × 10−5
Update Horizon (n)
1
Target (τ)
0.005
Temperature Initial Value
0.01
Temperature Target Entropy
−0.5 × |A|
Buffer Max Length
1,000,000
Buffer Min Length
5,000
Num Train Envs
1
Action Repeat
2
1
Max Episode Steps
1000
Table 6: Comparison of SimbaV2 hyperparameters across DMC-Hard, Humanoid Bench, and Mu-
JoCo. Identical values are merged for clarity.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D
INDIVIDUAL RESULTS
D.1
ONLINE RL AND DISCRETE CONTROL
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
5
10
Breakout
0
50
IQM Return
DemonAttack
2
4
CrazyClimber
2.5
5.0
Assault
0
5
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0
25
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.5
1.0
Tutankham
1
10
20
30
40
50
0
1
IQM Return
Qbert
1
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
MsPacman
1
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
BeamRider
DQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 8: Individual Results of benchmarking MINTO and DQN on 15 Atari games using the IM-
PALA architecture with LayerNorm. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with
95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
2.5
5.0
7.5
Boxing
2.5
5.0
Breakout
2.5
5.0
IQM Return
DemonAttack
2
4
CrazyClimber
2
4
Assault
0
2
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0
1
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.5
1.0
Tutankham
1
20
40
60
80 100
0
1
IQM Return
Qbert
1
20
40
60
80 100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
MsPacman
1
20
40
60
80 100
0.25
0.50
BeamRider
DQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 9: Individual Results of benchmarking MINTO and DQN on 15 Atari games using the CNN
network architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 5 seeds per game.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
2.5
5.0
7.5
Boxing
2.5
5.0
Breakout
0
5
IQM Return
DemonAttack
2
4
CrazyClimber
2
4
Assault
0
2
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0
1
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.5
1.0
Tutankham
1
20
40
60
80 100
0
1
IQM Return
Qbert
1
20
40
60
80 100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
MsPacman
1
20
40
60
80 100
0.0
0.5
BeamRider
Double DQN
FR-DQN
ScDQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 10: Individual Results of benchmarking Double DQN, FR-DQN, ScDQN, and MINTO on
15 Atari games using the CNN network architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM)
scores with 95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.2
MAXMIN DQN VS. MINTO
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
0
10
Breakout
0
5
IQM Return
DemonAttack
2
4
CrazyClimber
2
4
Assault
0
2
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0.5
1.0
1.5
Asterix
0
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0
1
Pong
0.5
1.0
Tutankham
1
20
40
60
80 100
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
Qbert
1
20
40
60
80 100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
MsPacman
1
20
40
60
80 100
0.0
0.5
BeamRider
Maxmin DQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 11: Individual Results of benchmarking Maxmin DQN and MINTO on 15 Atari games using
the CNN network architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95%
confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.3
DISTRIBUTIONAL RL
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
2.5
5.0
7.5
Boxing
5
10
Breakout
0
50
IQM Return
DemonAttack
3
4
CrazyClimber
5
10
Assault
0
10
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0
25
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.75
1.00
1.25
Tutankham
1
10
20
30
40
50
0.5
1.0
IQM Return
Qbert
1
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
MsPacman
1
10
20
30
40
50
0.25
0.50
BeamRider
IQN
IQN+MINTO (ours)
Figure 12: Individual Results of benchmarking IQN and IQN+MINTO on 15 Atari games using the
IMPALA architecture with LayerNorm. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with
95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
0
10
Breakout
0
10
IQM Return
DemonAttack
2
4
CrazyClimber
2.5
5.0
7.5
Assault
0
5
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0
2
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0
1
Pong
0.5
1.0
Tutankham
1
20
40
60
80 100
0
1
IQM Return
Qbert
1
20
40
60
80 100
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.25
0.50
0.75
MsPacman
1
20
40
60
80 100
0
1
BeamRider
IQN
IQN+MINTO (ours)
Figure 13: Individual Results of benchmarking IQN and IQN+MINTO on 15 Atari games using
the CNN network architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95%
confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.4
OFFLINE RL
0.00
0.25
IQM Return
VideoPinball
5.0
7.5
Boxing
5
10
Breakout
5
10
IQM Return
DemonAttack
0
2
CrazyClimber
1
2
Assault
0
2
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
1
2
FishingDerby
0.0
0.5
Asterix
1
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0
1
Qbert
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.25
0.50
IQM Return
MsPacman
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gradient steps (× 62.5K)
0.0
0.5
BeamRider
0
10 20 30 40 50
0
1
Performance Curve
CQL
CQL+MINTO (ours)
Figure 14: Individual Results of benchmarking CQL and CQL+MINTO on 14 Atari games using
the IMPALA architecture with LayerNorm. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores
with 95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
0
5
Breakout
0
2
IQM Return
DemonAttack
0
2
CrazyClimber
0.0
0.5
Assault
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
1
2
FishingDerby
0.0
0.1
Asterix
0.5
1.0
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.0
0.5
Qbert
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
IQM Return
MsPacman
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gradient steps (× 62.5K)
0.0
0.2
BeamRider
0
10 20 30 40 50
0
1
Performance Curve
CQL
CQL+MINTO (ours)
Figure 15: Individual Results of benchmarking CQL and CQL+MINTO on 14 Atari games using
the CNN architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 5 seeds per game.
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
0
5
Breakout
0
2
IQM Return
DemonAttack
0
2
CrazyClimber
0.0
0.5
Assault
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
1
2
FishingDerby
0.0
0.1
Asterix
0.5
1.0
IQM Return
Enduro
0
1
Pong
0.0
0.5
Qbert
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.00
0.25
IQM Return
MsPacman
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gradient steps (× 62.5K)
0.0
0.2
BeamRider
0
10 20 30 40 50
0
1
Performance Curve
Double CQL
FR-CQL
ScCQL
CQL+MINTO (ours)
Figure 16: Individual Results of benchmarking Double CQL, FR-CQL, ScCQL, and CQL+MINTO
on 14 Atari games using the CNN network architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile mean
(IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.5
MAXMIN CQL VS. MINTO
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
VideoPinball
2.5
5.0
7.5
Boxing
0
10
Breakout
0
5
IQM Return
DemonAttack
0
2
CrazyClimber
0.0
0.5
Assault
0
1
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
1
2
FishingDerby
0.00
0.25
Asterix
0.5
1.0
1.5
IQM Return
Enduro
0.5
1.0
Pong
0.0
0.5
Qbert
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
MsPacman
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gradient steps (× 62.5K)
0.0
0.2
BeamRider
0
10 20 30 40 50
0
1
Performance Curve
Maxmin CQL
CQL+MINTO (ours)
Maxmin CQL+MINTO (ours)
Figure 17:
Individual Results of benchmarking Maxmin CQL, CQL+MINTO, and Maxmin
CQL+MINTO on 14 Atari games using the CNN network architecture. Reported metrics are in-
terquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.6
ONLINE RL AND CONTINUOUS CONTROL
D.6.1
SIMBA
0
5000
10000
IQM Return
Humanoid-v4
5000
10000
HalfCheetah-v4
2000
4000
6000
Ant-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2000
4000
6000
IQM Return
Walker2d-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
2000
4000
Hopper-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
SimbaV2
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 18: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 5 MuJoCo
environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals
across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the normalized
return over all 5 environments.
0
2000
4000
6000
IQM Return
Humanoid-v4
5000
10000
HalfCheetah-v4
0
2000
4000
6000
Ant-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
Walker2d-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
1000
2000
3000
Hopper-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 19: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 5 MuJoCo
environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals
across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the normalized
return over all 5 environments.
34

--- Page 35 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-walk-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-stand-v0
0
200
400
h1-run-v0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
h1-reach-v0
0
100
200
h1-hurdle-v0
400
600
800
1000
h1-crawl-v0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-maze-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_simple-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_hard-v0
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-balance_simple-v0
50
100
150
h1-balance_hard-v0
0
200
400
h1-stair-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
200
400
IQM Return
h1-slide-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
250
500
750
h1-pole-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
SimbaV2
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 20: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 14 Hu-
manoid Bench environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% con-
fidence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of
the normalized return over all 14 environments.
35

--- Page 36 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-walk-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-stand-v0
0
100
200
h1-run-v0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
h1-reach-v0
0
100
200
h1-hurdle-v0
250
500
750
h1-crawl-v0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-maze-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_simple-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_hard-v0
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-balance_simple-v0
25
50
75
h1-balance_hard-v0
0
200
400
h1-stair-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-slide-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
250
500
750
h1-pole-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 21: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 14 Hu-
manoid Bench environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% con-
fidence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of
the normalized return over all 14 environments.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
500
IQM Return
humanoid-stand
0
200
400
600
humanoid-walk
0
100
200
humanoid-run
0
500
1000
dog-stand
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
1000
IQM Return
dog-walk
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
200
400
600
dog-run
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
dog-trot
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
SimbaV2
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 22: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 7 DMC-
Hard environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 7 environments.
0
500
IQM Return
humanoid-stand
0
250
500
750
humanoid-walk
0
100
200
humanoid-run
0
500
1000
dog-stand
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
IQM Return
dog-walk
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
200
400
600
dog-run
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
250
500
750
dog-trot
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 23: Individual Results of benchmarking SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 7 DMC-
Hard environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 7 environments.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.6.2
CROSSQ+WN
0
2000
4000
6000
IQM Return
Humanoid-v4
5000
10000
HalfCheetah-v4
0
2000
4000
6000
Ant-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
Walker2d-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
1000
2000
3000
Hopper-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
CrossQ+WN
CrossQ+WN + MINTO (ours)
Figure 24: Individual Results of benchmarking CrossQ+WN and CrossQ+WN + MINTO on the 5
MuJoCo environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 5 environments.
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
humanoid-stand
0
200
400
humanoid-walk
0
50
100
150
humanoid-run
0
500
1000
dog-stand
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
dog-walk
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
100
200
dog-run
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
200
400
dog-trot
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
CrossQ+WN
CrossQ+WN + MINTO (ours)
Figure 25: Individual Results of benchmarking CrossQ+WN and CrossQ+WN + MINTO on the 7
DMC-Hard environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confi-
dence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 7 environments.
38

--- Page 39 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-walk-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-stand-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-run-v0
0
2000
IQM Return
h1-reach-v0
0
100
200
h1-hurdle-v0
250
500
750
h1-crawl-v0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-maze-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_simple-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_hard-v0
0
200
400
600
IQM Return
h1-balance_simple-v0
25
50
75
h1-balance_hard-v0
0
200
400
h1-stair-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
200
400
IQM Return
h1-slide-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
200
400
600
h1-pole-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
CrossQ+WN
CrossQ+WN + MINTO (ours)
Figure 26: Individual Results of benchmarking CrossQ+WN and CrossQ+WN + MINTO on the 14
Humanoid Bench environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95%
confidence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM
of the normalized return over all 14 environments.
39

--- Page 40 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.6.3
FUNCTIONAL REGULARIZATION VS. MINTO
0
5000
10000
IQM Return
Humanoid-v4
5000
10000
HalfCheetah-v4
2000
4000
6000
Ant-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2000
4000
6000
IQM Return
Walker2d-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
1000
2000
3000
Hopper-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
FR-SimbaV2
FR-SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 27: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 5 Mu-
JoCo environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 5 environments.
2000
4000
6000
IQM Return
Humanoid-v4
5000
10000
HalfCheetah-v4
0
2000
4000
6000
Ant-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
Walker2d-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
1000
2000
3000
Hopper-v4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
FR-SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 28: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 5 Mu-
JoCo environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 5 environments.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-walk-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-stand-v0
0
200
400
h1-run-v0
0
2000
IQM Return
h1-reach-v0
0
100
200
h1-hurdle-v0
250
500
750
h1-crawl-v0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-maze-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_simple-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_hard-v0
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-balance_simple-v0
50
100
h1-balance_hard-v0
0
200
400
h1-stair-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
200
400
600
IQM Return
h1-slide-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
250
500
750
h1-pole-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
FR-SimbaV2
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 29: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 14 Hu-
manoid Bench environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% con-
fidence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of
the normalized return over all 14 environments.
41

--- Page 42 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-walk-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-stand-v0
0
100
200
h1-run-v0
0
2000
4000
IQM Return
h1-reach-v0
0
100
200
h1-hurdle-v0
250
500
750
h1-crawl-v0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-maze-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_simple-v0
0
250
500
750
h1-sit_hard-v0
0
250
500
750
IQM Return
h1-balance_simple-v0
25
50
75
h1-balance_hard-v0
0
200
400
h1-stair-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
100
200
300
IQM Return
h1-slide-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
250
500
750
h1-pole-v0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
Clipped Double Q
FR-SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 30: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 14 Hu-
manoid Bench environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% con-
fidence intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of
the normalized return over all 14 environments.
42

--- Page 43 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
500
IQM Return
humanoid-stand
0
200
400
600
humanoid-walk
0
100
200
humanoid-run
0
500
1000
dog-stand
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
1000
IQM Return
dog-walk
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
200
400
600
dog-run
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
dog-trot
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
FR-SimbaV2
SimbaV2+MINTO (ours)
Figure 31: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV2 and SimbaV2+MINTO on the 7 DMC-
Hard environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 7 environments.
0
500
IQM Return
humanoid-stand
0
250
500
750
humanoid-walk
0
100
200
humanoid-run
0
500
1000
dog-stand
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
500
IQM Return
dog-walk
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Environment Steps (in millions)
0
200
400
600
dog-run
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
250
500
750
dog-trot
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
IQM Norm Return
Performance Curve
FR-SimbaV1
SimbaV1+MINTO (ours)
Figure 32: Individual Results of benchmarking FR-SimbaV1 and SimbaV1+MINTO on the 7 DMC-
Hard environments. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence
intervals across 10 seeds per environment. The last plot (bottom right) shows the IQM of the
normalized return over all 7 environments.
43

--- Page 44 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D.7
ABLATION ON TARGET OPERATORS
0
20
IQM Return
VideoPinball
0
5
Boxing
0
5
Breakout
0
2
IQM Return
DemonAttack
0.0
2.5
CrazyClimber
0
2
Assault
0
1
IQM Return
SpaceInvaders
0
2
FishingDerby
0.0
0.5
Asterix
0
2
IQM Return
Enduro
0
1
Pong
0
1
Tutankham
1
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.5
IQM Return
Qbert
1
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Frames (in millions)
0.0
0.5
MsPacman
1
10
20
30
40
50
0.00
0.25
BeamRider
Online Only
Target Only
Max
Mean
Random
Min (ours)
Figure 33: Individual Results of benchmarking the Minimum operator of MINTO against other
potential operators on 15 Atari games using the CNN architecture. Reported metrics are interquartile
mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals across 5 seeds per game.
44

--- Page 45 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
0
1
2
IQM Return
Online Only
Target Only
Max
Mean
Random
Min (ours)
Final Performance
1
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Frames (in millions)
0
1
2
IQM Return
Performance Curve
Online Only
Target Only
Max
Mean
Random
Min (ours)
Figure 34: Cumulative results of benchmarking the Minimum operator of MINTO against other
potential operators on 15 Atari games using the CNN architecture. Both figures show the interquar-
tile mean (IQM) scores with 95% confidence intervals of the final performance of each operator.
Left: The final performance of each operator in a bar chart. Right: The performance curve for each
operator over 50 million frames.
45

--- Page 46 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
E
ANALYSIS OF VALUE ESTIMATION ERROR AND BIAS
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
IQM Return
Averaged Return
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
IQM MSE
Error Estimate in MSE
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.4
0.2
0.0
IQM Bias
Averaged Empirical Bias
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
IQM Loss
Training Loss
DQN
Double DQN
Maxmin DQN
MINTO (ours)
Figure 35: Results of benchmarking DQN, Double DQN, Maxmin DQN, and MINTO on the Car
on Hill environment, showing the Average Return, Value Estimation Error in Mean Squared Error
(MSE), Averaged Empirical Bias, and Training Loss. Reported metrics are interquartile mean (IQM)
scores with 95% confidence intervals across 100 seeds.
In this section, we examine how several value-based RL algorithms perform on the Car-on-the-
Hill control task. Our analysis centers on their estimation biases, learning stability, and overall
performance, as shown in Fig. 35. We further aim to evaluate whether MINTO’s use of recent
online estimates enables faster and more stable learning. We also examine the degree to which
MINTO exhibits estimation bias when compared with the corresponding baseline algorithms. In
particular, Fig. 36 illustrates the instability and severe overestimation bias that arise when relying
solely on online estimates for computing the regression target.
E.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We consider the Car-on-the-Hill environment from Ernst et al. (2005), modeled as a Markov deci-
sion process with continuous state space s = (x, v) (position and velocity) and discrete action space
A = {0, 1}. Episodes terminate upon either reaching the goal region (reward +1) or entering a
failure region (reward −1), with intermediate rewards equal to zero. The episode is limited to 100
steps with a discount factor γ = 0.95.
To obtain the true value function Q⋆, we follow the procedure in Ernst et al. (2005) by computing an
exact-lookup approximation on a fixed evaluation grid. For each state–action pair (s, a), we simulate
the deterministic transition and, if the successor state is non-terminal, we perform a breadth-first
search (BFS) over future trajectories up to a maximum depth K = 50. If a success terminal state
is discovered at depth k, we assign the discounted return γk−1; if only failure is reachable within
depth K, we assign −γk−1. This procedure yields a signed, discounted value that we treat as the
ground-truth target Q⋆(s, a).
For evaluation, we construct a 10 × 10 grid over the state bounds provided by the environment.
For each grid point, both actions are considered, yielding 200 fixed test states. The corresponding
ground-truth values Q⋆(s, a) are precomputed once and loaded during training.
E.2
ALGORITHMS AND HYPERPARAMETERS
We compare four value-based deep RL methods: DQN (Mnih et al., 2013), Double DQN (Van Has-
selt et al., 2016), Maxmin DQN (Lan et al., 2020), and our approach, MINTO. All agents use a
fully connected neural network with two hidden layers of 64 units each and ReLU activations. We
train the networks using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 and mini-batches of size 64
sampled from a replay buffer of capacity 100 000 transitions. A warm-up of 1 000 environment steps
is used before performing gradient updates. Target networks are updated every 1 000 environment
steps using a hard update.
Exploration follows an ε-greedy strategy, where ε is annealed linearly from 1.0 to 0.05 over the first
50 000 steps, and kept fixed afterwards. All agents are trained for 3 000 episodes. After each episode,
we evaluate the current Q-network on the fixed test grid and compute: (i) Value Estimation Error
in Mean Squared Error (MSE) E[( ˆQ(s, a) −Q⋆(s, a))2], (ii) Averaged Empirical Bias E[ ˆQ(s, a) −
46

--- Page 47 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Mean Return
Averaged Return
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.0
0.5
1.0
MSE
1e10 Error Estimate in MSE
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Bias
1e4 Averaged Empirical Bias
1
1000
2000
3000
Episodes
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Loss
1e8
Training Loss
Online Only
MINTO (ours)
Figure 36: Results of benchmarking Online Only baseline, and MINTO on the Car on Hill environ-
ment, showing the Average Return, Value Estimation Error in Mean Squared Error (MSE), Averaged
Empirical Bias, and Training Loss. Reported metrics are mean scores with 95% confidence intervals
across 100 seeds.
Q⋆(s, a)]. Policy performance is monitored by logging episodic Average Return during training and
evaluating the greedy policy (with ε = 0) every 20 episodes.
E.3
DISCUSSION
As anticipated, DQN exhibits a strong overestimation tendency, while Double DQN mitigates this
effect only moderately (see Fig. 35). Maxmin DQN, which relies on the minimum over two largely
independent value estimates, shows marked underestimation. In contrast, MINTO produces sub-
stantially lower overall bias without the severe downward bias characteristic of Maxmin DQN. Im-
portantly, the bias overshoot commonly observed in DQN and Double DQN is absent in MINTO.
While MINTO’s estimation error is broadly comparable to that of the baseline methods, it displays a
slight increase in variance, an expected outcome of incorporating an online component into the target
calculation. Nevertheless, MINTO solves the task faster than all other methods and does so without
exhibiting learning instability, despite incorporating online estimates into the target (see Fig. 35).
Although Car-on-the-Hill is a deterministic environment with minimal stochasticity, MINTO still
performs robustly and avoids the excessive conservatism normally associated with strong under-
estimation. Finally, in line with Schnell et al. (2025), we observe a similar pattern of training loss
increase followed by decrease for the discussed methods, and notably the pattern persists for MINTO
but at a lower amplitude.
On the other hand, we demonstrate the effect of relying solely on online estimates when computing
the regression target. Fig. 36 highlights the severe overestimation bias that arises from this approach.
As a consequence, the value estimation error increases significantly, resulting in degraded perfor-
mance. The training dynamics, as illustrated by the loss curve, further reveal pronounced instability
during learning. Overall, these results validate the design of MINTO, which mitigates such overesti-
mation bias and stabilizes learning by selecting the minimum estimate between the online and target
networks when computing the regression target.
47