--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ALL ROADS LEAD TO LIKELIHOOD: THE VALUE OF
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN FINE-TUNING
Gokul Swamy
Carnegie Mellon University
Sanjiban Choudhury & Wen Sun
Cornell University
Zhiwei Steven Wu & J. Andrew Bagnell
Carnegie Mellon University
ABSTRACT
From a first-principles perspective, it may seem odd that the strongest results in
foundation model fine-tuning (FT) are achieved via a relatively complex, two-stage
training procedure. Specifically, one first trains a reward model (RM) on some
dataset (e.g., human preferences) before using it to provide online feedback as
part of a downstream reinforcement learning (RL) procedure, rather than directly
optimizing the policy parameters on said dataset via offline maximum likelihood
estimation. In fact, from an information-theoretic perspective, we can only lose
information via passing through a reward model and cannot create any new infor-
mation via on-policy sampling. To explain this discrepancy, we scrutinize several
hypotheses on the value of RL in FT through both theoretical and empirical lenses.
Of the hypotheses considered, we find the most support for the explanation that on
problems with a generation-verification gap, (1) it is relatively easy to learn the
relatively simple RM (verifier) from the preference data. Then, (2) the downstream
RL procedure only returns policies (generators) that are optimal for such relatively
simple verifiers. Thus, end-to-end, two-stage online FT only has to search over a
reduced subset of the full space of policies, requiring less data than offline FT.
1
INTRODUCTION
Whether one refers to it as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF, Christiano et al.
(2017)), preference fine-tuning (PFT), or even “alignment,” the last step in the training pipeline of
a wide variety of foundation models (FMs) is fundamentally concerned with raising the generation
likelihood of preferred completions of a prompt relative to those of dis-preferred completions.
From this perspective, a natural question may be why anything other than maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) – i.e., standard supervised learning – is needed for the PFT problem. Indeed,
a plethora of offline approaches to PFT that directly optimize policy parameters via solving a
(regularized) classification problem on preference data have been proposed in the literature (e.g.,
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), IPO (Azar et al., 2023), SLiC-HF (Zhao et al., 2023)).
However, when one looks at the training procedure of today’s most capable models (Achiam et al.,
2023; Team et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), one almost always sees a relatively complex two-
stage procedure adopted instead. First, one learns a reward model (RM) – i.e., a classifier – on the
preference data, before using it to provide labels for a downstream online reinforcement learning
(RL) procedure that ultimately optimizes the policy’s parameters (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Stiennon et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2024a;b; Calandriello et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024).
Across academic (Tajwar et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024a), industry (Tang et al.,
2024), and open-source (HuggingFace, 2024) comparisons, we robustly see the relatively complex,
two-stage online techniques out-perform simpler purely offline approaches. More generally, online
approaches to supervised fine-tuning (SFT) have also been shown to out-perform vanilla next-token
prediction (Sun & van der Schaar, 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wulfmeier et al., 2024; Choudhury, 2025).
Furthermore, recent models capable of complex reasoning (e.g., OpenAI’s o1 (Jaech et al., 2024) or
DeepSeek’s r1 (Guo et al., 2025)) are still trained via on-policy RL rather than by using an offline
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Policies
(Generators)
Rewards
(Veriﬁers)
Figure 1: While offline preference fine-tuning (PFT) pro-
cedures (e.g., DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023)) directly opti-
mize policy parameters via (regularized) maximum likeli-
hood estimation (MLE, i.e., ˆπmle ∈Π), online PFT proce-
dures (e.g., standard RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017)) first
fit a reward model (RM) via MLE before using the RM to
provide online feedback for a downstream reinforcement
learning (RL) procedure. Empirically, this latter two-stage
procedure often works better, despite the loss of informa-
tion caused by passing through an RM. We find evidence
that for problems with a generation-verification gap, this
result may be best explained by viewing the first stage
as finding a relatively simple verifier / RM ˆrsim ∈Rsim,
with the end-to-end search over generators / policies now
simplified to just the subset of policies that are optimal for
relatively simple verifiers (i.e., ˆπrlhf ∈Π(Rsim) ⊂Π).
MLE procedure, with academic investigations concurring (Chu et al., 2025; Setlur et al., 2025). Thus,
we ask the following question:
Q: What is the value of two-stage, online FT if we just want to maximize data likelihood?
Part of the challenge of providing a satisfactory answer to this question lies in the difficulty of
applying traditional arguments about the value of online RL to FM post-training. First, the standard
justification for interaction – the learner being able to observe and therefore learn to recover from
their mistakes (Ross et al., 2011; Swamy et al., 2021) – does not appear to be true prima facie unless
we somehow give a language model the ability to delete tokens (Cundy & Ermon, 2023; Wulfmeier
et al., 2024). Second, the fact that it is common practice to use reward models that are at least as
large as the policy makes it difficult to naively apply classical arguments predicated on the relative
simplicity of rewards when compared to policies. This is because such arguments often implicitly
assume one is learning a reward model over a relatively simple function class (e.g., Ng et al. (2000)).
Perhaps even more fundamentally, the data processing inequality (MacKay, 2003) tells us that we
can only lose information when passing from the raw source of data to the reward model, and cannot
create any information during on-policy sampling. Taken together, these points make it seem as
though the “yellow-brick road” of online PFT may have been paved with pyrite rather than gold.
In response, we scrutinize a variety of hypotheses about the value of RL in PFT through theoretical
and experimental lenses. We mostly ground our study in preference FT, but note that analogous
arguments can be made for SFT and verifier-based RL settings. Our contributions are three-fold:
1. We prove that under idealized assumptions, online and offline PFT techniques should return
policies of equivalent quality. Using tools from information geometry, we show that regardless of
the coverage of preference dataset samples, offline and online PFT techniques have the same set of
optima when the same function class is used for both policies and reward models.
2. We provide evidence against several prior / novel hypotheses for the value of RL in PFT. In
particular, we provide evidence against explanations that rest solely on online techniques performing
better regularization to the reference policy, a computational benefit provided by on-policy sampling,
or the ability to use a wider distribution of data to train a reward model than to train a policy. While it
is hard to conclusively rule out these factors, we provide evidence that they are not the whole story.
3. We provide theoretical and empirical evidence for an alternative hypothesis on problems
with a generation-verification gap. Many problems in computer science are widely conjectured to
have simpler verifiers / reward models than generators / optimal policies (Godel, 1956; Cook, 2023).
We hypothesize that for such problems, it is easier to learn the relatively simple reward model than
the relatively complex optimal policy from the preference data. RL then merely serves as a way to
compute a (soft) optimal policy for this simple verifier. However, end-to-end, online PFT only has to
search over just those policies that are optimal for relatively simple verifiers. In short, we argue that:
A: The value of two-stage interactive FT is derived from an end-to-end reduction the space of
policies to search over to just those that are optimal for relatively simple verifiers.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In the language of statistical learning, this hypothesis states that the real benefit of RL in fine-tuning is
that it is the most convenient method that we know of for performing proper learning (Valiant, 1984),
compared to improper offline FT. We find the least evidence against this hypothesis compared to all
others we consider in this paper, which in some sense is the best we can hope for (Popper, 2014).
2
ON THE INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF FT
We begin with notation before deriving our core results. All proofs are located in Appendix B.
2.1
PRELIMINARIES
We consider a finite-horizon, reward-free Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman (2014)). Let X
denote the set of initial states (i.e., prompts) and ρ0 their distribution. We use A to denote the action
space (i.e., set of tokens) and S to denote the state space (i.e., set of partial generations). The dynamics
of our MDP are deterministic, known, and tree-structured: T (s′|s, a) = 1 if s′ = s◦a and 0 otherwise
(i.e., we can only append tokens). We use H to denote the horizon of our MDP (i.e., maximum
generation length). A policy π : S →∆(A) maps from a prefix to a distribution over next tokens.
A trajectory (i.e., a prompt and its completion) ξ is generated by sampling an initial state s0 ∼ρ0
and then sampling from the policy H times. We use Pπ(ξ) to denote the probability of sampling a
trajectory ξ under policy π and use PΠ to denote the set of all such distributions over trajectories
/ generations induced by any π ∈Π ⊆{S →∆(A)}. We use ξ ∼π as shorthand for sampling
from such a distribution (i.e., sampling a generation from the policy). We use D = {(ξ+
i , ξ−
i )}N
i=1 to
denote a dataset of trajectory-level preferences over pairs with the same s0 and PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0) to
denote the empirical probability that ξ1 is preferred to ξ2. The full space of trajectories is denoted
by Ξ, and Ξ|s0:h is used to denote the set of trajectories with some prefix s0:h. We use πref ∈Π to
denote the reference policy to stay close to. Both arg maxs and arg mins return the full set of optima.
2.2
GLOBAL AND LOCAL REWARD MODELS
Central to our study will the relationship between policies and trajectory-level reward models. We
will use Π to denote the set of policies and R to denote the set of reward models, with r : Ξ →R for
all r ∈R. We note that it is standard practice to use the same architecture (and often the same initial
checkpoint and dataset) to train both policies and reward models. Specifically, reward models are
often constructed by removing the final softmax at the end of the transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
that gives us a distribution over tokens and replacing it with a single layer or a shallow MLP that
eventually outputs a single scalar value (Rafailov et al., 2023). These models are then evaluated with
the concatenated prompt and entire completion sH being passed into the transformer. Throughout
this paper, we will use the term global to refer to such trajectory-level (i.e., non-Markovian) RMs.
Beyond merely having a shared backbone, a more precise isomorphism holds for reward models that
take the form of the sum of policy log probabilities over the tokens in a generation (Degrave et al.,
2019; Rafailov et al., 2023). More formally, we denote the set of local RMs rπ : Ξ →R as
R(Π) =
(
rπ(ξ) =
H
X
h=0
log π(ah|sh)
π ∈Π
)
.
(1)
It directly follows that R(Π) is isomorphic to Π.
2.3
A UNIFIED OBJECTIVE FOR FINE-TUNING
We now formulate a general loss function that both online and offline (P)FT methods optimize, albeit
with different procedures. Loosely speaking, a variety of fine-tuning tasks (e.g., SFT, PFT) roughly
fit within the template of the following reverse KL-regularized policy optimization problem:
π⋆= arg min
π∈Π
Ez∼D

DKL(PD(z)||PZ
π (z))

|
{z
}
Data Likelihood
+
β DKL(Pπ(ξ)||Pπref(ξ))
|
{z
}
Prior Reg.
,
(2)
where z ∈Z denotes an ordered pair of trajectories for PFT. The first forward KL term measures
how likely samples from D are under the learned policy π and the second reverse KL term keeps the
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: We can view both offline and offline PFT as solv-
ing Eq. 3. Offline methods directly project the preference
dataset D onto policy class Π under forward KL (§2.4),
while online methods first project from D onto reward class
R under forward KL (§2.4), before projecting onto Π under
reverse KL (§2.5). A similar characterization of online PFT
is made in the concurrent work of Xiao et al. (2025).
completion probabilities of π to be close to those of the reference policy πref on-policy. Intuitively,
if D had full coverage over all possible z, we would have no need for the second term, but due to
finite-sample limitations, we add in a regularizer to prevent us from being lead too far astray (Gao
et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024a). That said, for simplicity of presentation, we will consider the case
where β = 1 and temporarily replace the second KL regularization term with entropy regularization:
π⋆= arg min
π∈Π
Ez∼D

DKL(PD(z)||PZ
π (z))

−H(π),
(3)
where H(π) = Eξ∼π
hPH
h −log π(ah|sh)
i
is the (causal) entropy of the policy (Ziebart, 2010).
2.4
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD IN PFT
We will first focus on minimizing the forward KL (FKL) term of (3), which is equivalent to maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE). Given this MLE objective, both online and offline methods aim to find
a model that best explains the data, but search over different model classes. The first stage of online
PFT methods is MLE over reward models in R. A common parametric model that relates rewards to
preference probabilities is the Bradley-Terry (BT) Model (Bradley & Terry, 1952):
PBT
r (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0) = σ (r(ξ1) −r(ξ2)) ,
(4)
where ≻means preferred to and σ is the sigmoid function. We can then maximize likelihood over
global reward models, each of which parametrizes a probabilistic model via BT:
ˆrmle = arg min
r∈R
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

(5)
= arg max
r∈R
N
X
i
log σ(r(ξ+
i ) −r(ξ−
i )).
(6)
Observe that fitting a global RM is essentially solving standard logistic regression or classification
problem. In contrast, offline PFT methods instead perform MLE directly over the policy class Π.
Recall that any policy π ∈Π is also a local RM rπ ∈R(Π) (defined in (1)). Thus, we can fit a policy
via MLE by substituting in the sum of log probabilities for rπ in the Bradley-Terry likelihood:
ˆπmle = arg min
π∈Π
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
rπ (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

(7)
= arg max
π∈Π
N
X
i
log σ(rπ(ξ+
i ) −rπ(ξ−
i ))
(8)
= arg max
π∈Π
N
X
i
log σ
 H
X
h
log
π(a+
h,i|s+
h,i)
π(a−
h,i|s−
h,i)
!
= arg max
π∈Π
ℓmle(π).
(9)
Ignoring the reference policy for a moment, this is what offline PFT approaches like DPO are at heart:
a trajectory-level classification problem over local (rather than global) reward models.
2.5
MAXIMUM ENTROPY IN PFT
The second stage of online PFT corresponds to optimizing a learned reward and the second entropy
term in (3). Given a learned global reward model r, one computes its soft-optimal policy π⋆
r, i.e.
π⋆
r = arg max
π∈Π
Eξ∼π[r(ξ)] + H(π).
(10)
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
If we solved the above equation in closed-form over all policies (i.e., not just those in Π), we would
compute a policy with prompt-conditioned trajectory (i.e., completion) distribution
P⋆
r(ξ|s0) =
exp(r(ξ))
P
ξ′∈Ξ|s0 exp(r(ξ′)) = exp(r(ξ))
Z(r, s0) ,
(11)
as first proved by Ziebart (2010). Observe that for trajectories ξ1, ξ2 with shared prompt s0,
PBT
r (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0) = σ(log(P⋆
r(ξ1|s0)) −log(P⋆
r(ξ2|s0))).
(12)
Interestingly, it turns out that solving a soft RL problem like Eq. 10 can be thought of as a reverse KL
projection (Nielsen, 2020) from P⋆
r onto the set of policy-induced trajectory distributions.
Lemma 2.1 (Soft RL is an RKL Projection). Let r ∈R be a global or local reward model. Define
π⋆= arg minπ∈Π DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r) as the trajectory-level reverse KL projection of P⋆
r onto Π. Next,
define π⋆
r as the soft-optimal policy computed by solving Eq. 10 over Π. Then, π⋆= π⋆
r. [Proof]
We prove a version with a reverse KL regularization to a reference policy in the appendix. In summary,
we can view the online two-stage RLHF procedure as (1) minimizing the forward KL from the data
over reward models in R to find ˆrmle, before (2) minimizing the trajectory-level reverse KL over
policies in Π to the soft-optimal policy under ˆrmle. We summarize this argument visually in Fig. 2.
2.6
EQUIVALENCES WITH ISOMORPHIC CLASSES
The preceding subsections beg the question: what does taking a detour through a reward model buy
us if we immediately project back to policy space? As we prove below, under certain assumptions,
all we have done is taken a more circuitous route to likelihood maximization. We now state our first
equivalence result: assuming exact optimization, no reference policy, and most critically, isomorphic
reward and policy classes, online and offline PFT will produce the same solution:
Theorem 2.2 (RLHF is MLE when R = R(Π)). Assume that R = R(Π) (i.e. they both cover the
same set of reward functions regardless of representation). Define ˆrmle as in Eq. 6, ˆπmle as in Eq. 9,
and ˆπrlhf = {arg maxπ∈Π Eξ∼π[˜rmle(ξ)] + H(π)|˜rmle ∈ˆrmle}. Then, we have ˆπrlhf = ˆπmle. [Proof]
In more traditional terminology, MLE is invariant to re-parameterization. Under a realizability
assumption, we can prove an analogous result with regularization to a reference policy:
Theorem 2.3 (RLHF is DPO when R = R(Π)). Assume that R = R(Π) (i.e. they both cover the
same set of reward functions regardless of how they are represented). Define ˆrmle as in Eq. 6 and
ℓdpo(π) =
N
X
i
log σ
 H
X
h
log
π(a+
h,i|s+
h,i)
πref(a+
h,i|s+
h,i) −log
π(a−
h,i|s−
h,i)
πref(a−
h,i|s−
h,i)
!
.
Next, define ˆπdpo
=
arg maxπ∈Π ℓdpo(π), π⋆
dpo
=
arg maxπ∈{S→∆(A)} ℓdpo(π), π⋆
mle
=
arg maxπ∈{S→∆(A)} ℓmle(π), and ˆπrlhf = {arg maxπ∈Π Eξ∼π[˜rmle(ξ)] −DKL(Pπ||Pπref)|˜rmle ∈ˆrmle}.
Then, if π⋆
mle, π⋆
dpo ⊂Π, we have ˆπrlhf = ˆπdpo. [Proof]
In summary, the preceding results tell us that under certain assumptions, all roads lead to likelihood –
i.e., expending computation for on-policy sampling provides no discernible benefit over offline MLE.
We now attempt to square these idealized theoretical results with the reality of empirical practice.
3
ON THE VALUE OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN FINE-TUNING
To better understand where the preceding theory falls short, we now proceed by performing a series
of controlled experiments. We focus on the task of learning to summarize from preference feedback
(Stiennon et al., 2020) (tl;dr) on the pythia series of models (Biderman et al., 2023). We report
the winrate of our trained models against human-generated references, as evaluated by gpt-4o.
Controlling for Confounders. To make an apple-to-apples comparison between online and offline
PFT methods, we make a concerted effort to hold factors other than on-policy feedback constant.
First, to rule out the confounder of a different loss function for offline (e.g., DPO (Rafailov et al.,
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2023)) and online (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)) PFT, we use the same DPO loss (Rafailov et al.,
2023) for all training, both because of its practical ubiquity and because there is no clear way to use
an RM in offline PFT. 1 Thus, our experiments focus on (offline) DPO (as originally proposed) vs.
online DPO. Second, we follow standard practice and train global RMs using the same preference
data and starting from the same SFT checkpoint as we use for offline DPO, with a single additional
linear layer bolted on for global RMs (Rafailov et al., 2023). Thus, our experiments can be seen as a
relatively faithful implementation of the “isomorphic classes” setting we explored theoretically in §2.
For the second stage of online PFT, we perform online DPO (Guo et al., 2024). Concretely, starting
from the base policy, we sample 25 completions for each prompt in the preference dataset, rank
these completions according to the RM, and use the top and bottom of the list as the preferred and
dis-preferred completions for DPO loss minimization. We regularize to whatever policy generated
the data. We emphasize that the only change between offline and online DPO is the training data – we
use all of the same hyperparameters for all training runs. Below, we use Online DPO (Model)
to refer to online DPO using on-policy samples from the policy in parentheses.
Online DPO > Offline DPO. In Figure 3, we see that despite our best efforts to control for confound-
ing variables, we see a significant gap between online and offline DPO, contradicting §2’s theory.
While any experiment will have imperfect optimization unlike we assumed in §2, we note it is equally
imperfect across both online and offline DPO, and therefore unlikely to be the differentiating factor.
SFT
DPO
DPO
(2x)
On.DPO
(SFT)
On.DPO
(DPO)
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
26.2
49.7
52.2
56.1
59.3
pythia-1.4B tl;dr
SFT
DPO
On.DPO
(SFT)
On.DPO
(DPO)
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
30.5
54.9
60.8
59.4
pythia-2.8B tl;dr
Figure 3: We see online PFT robustly out-
perform offline PFT on tl;dr as judged
by gpt-4o, despite using the same SFT
checkpoint and preference data for train-
ing all policies / reward models. We report
winrates for all methods across 3 seeds.
Perhaps the most immediate question one might have is whether we are simply running more gradient
steps for online DPO than for offline DPO. However, both DPO and Online DPO (SFT) start
from the same SFT model and take the same number of gradient steps, yet we see a difference in
performance. The same is true for DPO(2x) (in which we perform two epochs of offline DPO) and
Online DPO (DPO) (in which we perform online DPO starting from the output of offline DPO).
Also noteworthy is the improved performance of Online DPO (DPO) over the base DPO policy:
without any extra human feedback / data, a global RM trained on the same preference data as was
used for DPO is able to further improve the DPO policy. In some sense, there appears to be more
“juice to squeeze” from RMs than from policies, even when both are trained on the same human data.
In short, the results of our preceding carefully controlled experiments echo those of prior work: online
PFT robustly outperforms offline PFT (Tajwar et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024a; Tang
et al., 2024; HuggingFace, 2024). We note analogous results have been found in the SFT (Sun &
van der Schaar, 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wulfmeier et al., 2024) and reasoning (Chu et al., 2025;
Setlur et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025) domains, suggesting a general phenomena beyond just PFT.
Appendix A: A Quintet of Hypotheses for the Online-Offline Gap.
To explain this performance gap, we explore 6 hypotheses in total. Due to limited space, we
highlight only the hypothesis that we failed to falsify, while relegating all the other 5 to App.
A. There, we present controlled experiments that rule out alternative explanations for the gap,
including H1: Intrinsic Value of Online Samples (§A.1), H2: Failure of Offline PFT Regularization
to πref (§A.2), H3: Relative Ease of Online PFT Optimization (§A.3), H4: Global RMs Can
Be Trained on More Data (§A.4), and H5: Global RMs Generalize Better OOD (§A.5). To
summarize App. A, we observe that despite the lack of information-theoretic separation, online
PFT out-performs offline PFT across different sampling distributions, labelers, and model sizes.
Furthermore, it appears to be “easier” to learn a global RM than it is to learn a local RM, evidenced
by better ID and OOD generalization. Together, our theoretical and empirical results beg the
question of whether there is some feature of the problem we are not accounting for in our theory.
1Note that the choice of the DPO loss rules out explanations that rest on reward model variance (Razin et al.,
2025), as no algorithm (either offline or online) gets to see raw reward model outputs, only binarized labels.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4
GENERATION-VERIFICATION GAPS IN FINE-TUNING
To set up our final hypothesis H6, we first note that for many problems of practical interest, the
reward function is a simpler object (i.e., can be represented by a circuit of lower depth) than the
corresponding (soft) optimal policy. For example, this is the heart of the classical argument for the
inverse RL approach to imitation (i.e., learning a reward model from demonstrations and decoding it
via RL) over behavioral cloning (i.e., directly learning a policy via MLE) given by Ng et al. (2000).
By framing policies as generators and reward models as verifiers, this argument can be viewed
as part of a widespread phenomenon in computer science, where generation is often harder than
verification (Godel, 1956). Indeed, if the widely-held belief that P ̸= NP (Cook, 2023) is true, there
must then exist such problems. For these problems in NP (loosely, polynomial-time verification) but
not P (loosely, polynomial-time generation), we know there must exist a polynomial-depth verifier
circuit but not necessarily a polynomial-depth generator circuit (Cook, 2000). Uniform convergence
then tells us that we would need fewer samples to accurately fit a verifier than a generator, as a less
expressive function class could be used to approximate the former (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 2015).
While initially promising, the story becomes more complex when we account for the facts that (a)
uniform convergence often does not accurately predict the behavior of deep learning (Nagarajan &
Kolter, 2019) and (b) even if it did, in the isomorphic classes setting (i.e., R = R(Π)), we have the
same number of verifiers / generators to search over. This means that we should have the same sample
complexity for both MLE problems. Indeed, Ng et al. (2000) implicitly assume that |R| ≪|Π|.
However, a wide variety of works have observed that overparameterized models like deep neural
networks, when optimized with stochastic gradient descent, learn lower-depth circuits with fewer
samples than higher-depth circuits. One can attribute this to either an implicit regularization effect of
the training algorithm (e.g., the bias of SGD towards minimum norm solutions (Soudry et al., 2024;
Gunasekar et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018)), architectural inductive biases towards simpler functions
(e.g., the double descent phenomenon (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2021), the spectral bias of
deep networks (Rahaman et al., 2019), or those mentioned in some explanations of grokking (Varma
et al., 2023) and length generalization (Zhou et al., 2023)), deep learning performing approximate
Solomonoff Induction (Schulman, 2023), or certain data-dependent complexity measures (Arora et al.,
2019). Regardless of one’s preferred reasoning as to why, using a larger network than necessary often
doesn’t hurt sample complexity in practice (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Radford et al., 2019).
Building on these observations, we now propose a novel hypothesis H6 for the online-offline perfor-
mance gap on problems with (1) a generation-verification gap and (2) a reward model class R where
simpler functions can be learned with fewer samples (e.g., deep neural networks like transformers):
H6: Online PFT is Proper Policy Learning.
For fine-tuning problems with a simpler underlying reward function than (soft) optimal policy
and a reward model class R that enables learning simpler functions with fewer samples, the first
step of online fine-tuning is finding a relatively simple reward model ˆrsim ∈Rsim ⊂R, with the
second step then finding a (soft) optimal policy for ˆrsim, ˆπrlhf ∈Π(Rsim). Thus, end to end, online
fine-tuning only has to choose between policies in Π(Rsim) ⊂Π, rather than across all of Π.
In essence, the above hypothesis is stating that offline FT solves the harder, improper (Valiant, 1984)
learning problem over all of Π, while online FT only has to solve the easier proper learning problem
over Π(Rsim) ⊂Π, thereby reducing sample complexity and leading to better policy performance.
Put differently, H6 states that there is a statistical separation between online and offline (P)FT. 2
Under the above hypothesis, if we could somehow constrain offline FT to only pick policies that are
(soft) optimal for relatively simple reward models (i.e., ˆπmle ∈Π(Rsim)), we would achieve the same
results as online FT. We can prove this under (slightly) weaker assumptions than isomorphic classes:
2In various theoretical settings, one can show there is a computational speedup from improper learning (e.g.,
Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2012)). However, such a relaxation can incur a significant sample complexity increase
if the encompassing class we now have to search over is large enough. Another perspective on H6 is that the
computational-statistical trade-off may not be in favor of improper learning on practical PFT problems.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Theorem 4.1 (RLHF is MLE Over Π(Rsim)). Let Rsim ⊂R be an arbitrary subset of the space of
reward models and let
Π(Rsim) =

arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r)
r ∈Rsim

be the corresponding set of soft-optimal policies. Also, let
ˆrsim = arg min
r∈Rsim
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

,
ˆπrlhf =

arg max
π∈Π
Eξ∼π[˜rmle(ξ)] + H(π)
˜rsim ∈ˆrsim

,
ˆπsim = arg min
π∈Π(Rsim)
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
rπ(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

.
Then, if

π⋆
r
r ∈Rsim

⊂Π, ˆπrlhf = ˆπsim. [Proof]
In words, this theorem is saying that if the secondary, RL-based reverse KL projection is without loss,
RLHF will recover the MLE over the constrained policy space Π(Rsim). Critically, it is unclear how
else one could actually enforce this constraint other than by the two-stage procedure of first learning a
relatively simple RM before optimizing it via RL.3 Intuitively, we can view this hypothesis as stating
that while all roads lead to likelihood, RL on a simple RM lets us take a shortcut through Π.
4.1
FAILING TO FALSIFY H6
First, one may naturally ask what evidence we have for verification being easier than generation for
summarization problems. In response, we provide evidence that the underlying reward function is
well-approximated by a smaller network than one needs for the policy. In Fig. 4, we observe that
using a global RM that is significantly smaller than the generation policy leads to nearly identical
BoN performance as using an RM that is the same size as the policy. The converse claim is also
true: using a global RM that is significantly larger than the generation policy leads to no discernible
improvement in terms of BoN performance. Taken together, these experiments suggest that the verifier
is qualitatively simpler (i.e., well-approximated by a shallower depth circuit) than the generator.
12
5
10
25
N
35
40
45
50
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-6.9B BoN: SFT
12
5
10
25
N
25
30
35
40
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-1.4B BoN: SFT
Global 1.4B
Global 2.8B
Global 6.9B
Base
Figure 4: Scaling up re-
ward model size doesn’t
improve BoN perfor-
mance, but scaling up
policy size does.
Re-
sults across 3 seeds.
We next observe that H6 correctly predicts all of the experimental results in App. A, which falsified
the other hypotheses. In short, none of these experiments altered the relative complexity of generation
versus verification of the underlying problem, which explains why we consistently saw a performance
gap. First, the effective reduction in search space explains the improved performance we saw in Fig. 3.
Next, the generation-verification gap is unchanged by prompt augmentation (Fig. 8), different sample
and label distributions (Fig. 9), and provides a concrete explanation for the observed difference in
in-distribution validation likelihoods between local and global RMs (Fig. 10): global RMs only need
to learn a simpler reward function, while local RMs must learn a fundamentally more complex object
(equivalent to a generator) to effectively fit the training set. Such better in-distribution margins would
likely correlate with the better OOD generalization of global RMs relative to local RMs in Fig. 11.
To further attempt to falsify H6, we make a testable prediction: on tasks where there is limited if any
generation-verification gap, online PFT would be unlikely to out-perform offline PFT. For example,
if we were to use a reward function for grading the quality of summarization that is as complicated
3An interesting direction of future work is off-policy RL algorithms that can take advantage of learned RMs.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
as the corresponding (soft) optimal policy, we would expect the previously consistent gap between
online and offline PFT to vanish. We explore 2 ways of eliminating the generation-verification gap:
SFT
DPO
On.DPO
(DPO)
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
6.3
21.9
23.2
pythia-1.4B Two-Word
Figure 5: On the bandit-like task of two-word
summarization (≈
1
10 of the usual horizon H),
we see online PFT provide a minimal at best
improvement of ≈1% winrate over offline PFT,
unlike all prior results. Results across 3 seeds.
DPO
On.DPO
(DPO)
DPO
(2x)
Val.
ROUGE-L(↑)
0.354
0.352
0.358
pythia-1.4B ROUGE-L
Figure 6: When we label data and evaluate com-
pletions with the ROUGE-L metric against unob-
served reference summaries, we see online PFT
provided no improvement over offline PFT, un-
like all prior results. Results across 3 seeds.
Closing the Generation-Verification Gap I. One way to reduce the relative complexity of generation
compared to that of verification is to reduce the horizon H of the problem. In the extreme of H = 1
(i.e., a contextual bandit (Li et al., 2010)), the complexity of learning the reward function and of
learning the (soft) optimal policy should be the same as we can directly compute the latter from
the former with a simple action-level / “token-wise” softmax and vice-versa (i.e., no real multi-step
planning / reinforcement learning required). Intuitively, setting H = 1 is simplifying the policy.
We instantiate this idea with the task of generating two-word summaries (i.e., less than
1
10 of the
preceding maximum generation length). Given we don’t have ground-truth human preferences for
this task, we use gpt-4o to generate pairs of summaries, rank these summaries, provide reference
summaries on the test set of prompts, and compute the final winrate numbers. As before, we use
this data for offline DPO as well as for learning the global RM. Continuing to parallel the above, we
then sample from the offline DPO policy, rank these completions with the global RM, and use this
dataset for an iteration of online DPO. In Figure 5, we see that in contrast to all prior experiments
that kept the complexity of generation higher than that of verification, we see that online DPO does
not meaningfully improve the performance of the offline DPO policy, as predicted by H6.
Closing the Generation-Verification Gap II. Another way to eliminate the gap is by choosing a
reward function from which we can easily “read off” the (soft) optimal policy without an explicit
planning / reinforcement learning procedure. Specifically, we conduct an experiment using the
ROUGE-L metric (Lin, 2004), which essentially counts how many words of the generated summary
appear (in order) in an unobserved human-generated reference summary, as a reward function. For
such a problem, the minimal-complexity verifier would need to include a lookup table that maps from
prompts to the exact text of the unobserved reference summaries, a tall order. Furthermore, given
this lookup table, it would be trivial to generate optimally, implying that generation and verification
should be of similar complexities. Intuitively, this setup is complicating the reward function.
To create our preference dataset, we sample from the policy and use the ROUGE-L metric to rank
samples, as well as for evaluation. In Figure 6, we see that doing an iteration of online DPO with
feedback from a learned global RM does not improve the performance of the base offline DPO policy,
unlike all but the previous result, as predicted by H6. Doing an extra epoch of offline DPO does
(slightly) improve the ROUGE-L score, implying offline DPO has not reached optimal performance.
We conclude this section by noting that similar results on the benefits of learning a verifier rather
than directly learning a generator for fine-tuning have been observed in both the SFT (Sun & van der
Schaar, 2024; Choudhury, 2025) – where this flavor of approach is more commonly known as inverse
RL (Ziebart, 2010; Swamy et al., 2021) – and reasoning domains (Chu et al., 2025; Setlur et al., 2025;
Xiang et al., 2025). These results can be seen as further evidence for H6, outside of the PFT domain.
4.2
ISOMORPHISMS AREN’T ALWAYS A TWO-WAY STREET
A lingering question in the reader’s mind might be “if policies and rewards are isomorphic in soft
RL, why does it take more data to learn the former?” In particular, we know from Eq. 11 that we
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
can map from rewards to trajectory distributions, from which we can extract a policy via soft value
iteration (Ziebart, 2010). Perhaps the most impressive insight of Rafailov et al. (2023) is that we can
invert this isomorphism (up to the partition function Z(r, s0) which cancels out in the Bradley-Terry
likelihood) and instead express a local reward model in terms of its implied soft-optimal policy, as in
Eq. 9. However, as later observed by Rafailov et al. (2024), it is more accurate to think of a local RM
as a Q-function rather than as a reward function: a fundamentally different and often more complex
object that needs to perform token-level credit assignment and encode multi-step reasoning.
In greater detail, we know from Ziebart (2010) that π⋆
r has a (soft) Q-function given by
Q⋆
r(sh, ah) = log


X
ξ∈Ξ|sh,ah
exp(r(ξ))

, π⋆
r(ah|sh) =
exp(Q⋆
r(sh, ah))
P
a∈A exp(Q⋆r(sh, a)) = exp(Q⋆
r(sh, ah))
V ⋆
r (sh)
.
Observe that the next-token logits of a softmax policy are its implied soft Q-function (up to a state-
wise shift). Also, recall that these were the optimization variables in our offline MLE problem (Eq. 9).
Thus, MLE over softmax policies (i.e., fitting local RMs) corresponds to directly fitting Q-functions.
Defining Q⋆
R = {Q⋆
r|r ∈R} as the set of soft-Q functions for some r ∈R, we know that R ∼= Q⋆
R
by construction. However, just because such an isomorphism exists, it does not need to be true
that both endpoints are equally easy to represent: one endpoint (e.g., Q⋆
R) could require far deeper
circuits to be well-approximated than the other (e.g., R). When learning algorithms optimize over
circuit classes that contain these function classes, uniform convergence would then tell us we need
more samples to learn the former than the latter, as we have to search over circuits of greater depth.
Thus, even though R ∼= Q⋆
R, the fact that we are actually fitting these functions from data means that
we have to pay statistically for their relative representational complexities during offline MLE.
To build some intuition for the complexity of r vs. Q⋆
r, let us consider navigating through a maze
with a single goal with +1 reward. Then, a circuit that represents r only needs to encode the position
of the goal, while a circuit that represents Q⋆
r needs to encode the path to the goal from any position
in the maze. As we scale up the horizon H of the planning problem, the optimal policy π⋆
r can reach
the goal from a wider set of states. Thus, Q⋆
r becomes more complex, as nonzero value is achieved on
a broader swathe of the state space. As π⋆
r is a simple softmax over Q⋆
r, it also grows in complexity.
Figure 7:
Consider maze
navigation. Reward r just
needs to encode the goal,
while Q⋆
r needs to encode
the distance to the goal
from anywhere. Q⋆
r grows
more complex with h.
As we discussed in §4, such a difference in circuit complexity between r and π⋆
r or Q⋆
r is one way of
formalizing the notion of a generation-verification gap. This means that beyond the examples we
explore in §4, App. A, and Fig. 7’s maze example, for problems in NP but not P, we should expect
that π⋆
r and Q⋆
r require a deeper circuit to represent than r. Then, a learning algorithm that doesn’t
have the ability to search over just Q⋆
R (e.g., via RL on all r ∈R) must instead search over a class of
deeper circuits containing Q⋆
R. Thus, learning Q⋆
r or π⋆
r requires more data than to learn r.
Intuitively, these RL problems in NP but not P require meaningful, multi-step reasoning to solve.
However, not all RL problems require multi-step reasoning / have a generation-verification gap. In
fact, in §4.1, we provide multiple examples of such problems for which the greedy (H = 1) policy is
optimal and don’t see a difference in terms of the number of samples required to learn r vs. π⋆
r or Q⋆
r.
These problems have an effective horizon (Laidlaw et al., 2023) of H ≈1. Thus, r, π⋆
r, and Q⋆
r have
similar circuit complexities and require similar amounts of data to learn, matching our results.
To close, one might counter that whether we first fit a reward function and then apply RL to it or
directly fit a Q function, we eventually want to end up with a policy. While true, recall that the second
stage of online PFT requires no more preference data samples: we only pay in terms of computation.
Thus, a different perspective on H6 is that online PFT trades data for computation: rather than paying
statistically for directly fitting a potentially more complex Q function via MLE like offline PFT,
online PFT instead pays computationally during the secondary RL procedure. One can view this as a
computational-statistical trade-off (Chandrasekaran & Jordan, 2013) for preference fine-tuning.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In summary, while isomorphisms go both ways, they aren’t always a two-way street: the two
endpoints of an isomorphism can have dramatically different circuit complexities, which can manifest
as a statistical cost when fitting the more complex endpoint (e.g., Q⋆
R). Instead, one can fit the simpler
endpoint (e.g., R) and compute the isomorphism (e.g., via RL) to save data at the cost of compute.
5
DISCUSSION
Practically, H6 tells us that for problems where we believe verification is simpler than generation, it
is a better use of limited human preference data to learn verifiers rather than generators. Hypothesis
H6 also suggests that for increasingly complex problems that require longer-range planning (e.g.
multi-turn RLHF, agentic tasks, or even real-world robotics), we should see an even greater separation
between online and offline PFT than we saw in our experiments. H6 also suggests variety of future
research directions. For example, one might ensure that current reward model architectures are able
to accurately represent human preferences. As argued by Swamy et al. (2024), the diversity of rater
views often results in intransitive preferences, which can’t be rationalized by any reward model. More
broadly, given our overarching framing in terms of likelihood maximization, analogous arguments to
ours for H6 could be made beyond the PFT setting (e.g., for the SFT / imitation learning setting).
6
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Geoff Gordon and Kiante Brantley for helpful discussions, and Zhaolin Gao and Yuda Song
for experimental advice. GKS and ZSW were supported in part by a STTR grant. WS acknowledges
funding from NSF IIS-2154711, NSF CAREER 2339395, and DARPA LANCER: LeArning Network
CybERagents. SC is supported in part by a Google Faculty Research Award, OpenAI SuperAlignment
Grant, ONR Young Investigator Award, NSF RI #2312956, and NSF FRR#2327973.
REFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, and Ruosong Wang. Fine-grained analysis of
optimization and generalization for overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 322–332. PMLR, 2019.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal
Valko, and Rémi Munos. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12036, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Afonso S Bandeira, Amelia Perry, and Alexander S Wein. Notes on computational-to-statistical gaps:
predictions using statistical physics. Portugaliae mathematica, 75(2):159–186, 2018.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning
practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle Oâ ˘A´ZBrien,
Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward
Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Daniele Calandriello, Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang, Bernardo Avila Pires,
Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu, et al. Human alignment of
large language models through online preference optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08635,
2024.
Shicong Cen, Jincheng Mei, Katayoon Goshvadi, Hanjun Dai, Tong Yang, Sherry Yang, Dale
Schuurmans, Yuejie Chi, and Bo Dai. Value-incentivized preference optimization: A unified
approach to online and offline rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19320, 2024.
Venkat Chandrasekaran and Michael I Jordan. Computational and statistical tradeoffs via convex
relaxation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(13):E1181–E1190, 2013.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
2024.
Sanjiban Choudhury. Process reward models for llm agents: Practical framework and directions,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10325.
Sanjiban Choudhury and Paloma Sodhi. Better than your teacher: Llm agents that learn from
privileged ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05434, 2024.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Jihan Yang, Shengbang Tong, Saining Xie, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V
Le, Sergey Levine, and Yi Ma. Sft memorizes, rl generalizes: A comparative study of foundation
model post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17161, 2025.
Stephen Cook. The p versus np problem. Clay Mathematics Institute, 2(6):3, 2000.
Stephen A Cook. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Logic, automata, and computa-
tional complexity: The works of Stephen A. Cook, pp. 143–152. 2023.
Chris Cundy and Stefano Ermon. Sequencematch: Imitation learning for autoregressive sequence
modelling with backtracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05426, 2023.
Amit Daniely, Nati Linial, and Shai Shalev Shwartz. More data speeds up training time in learning
halfspaces over sparse vectors, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2271.
Jonas Degrave, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
Quinoa: a q-function you infer normalized over actions, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1911.01831.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, DJ Dvijotham,
Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, et al. Helping or herd-
ing? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.09244, 2023.
Adam Fisch, Jacob Eisenstein, Vicky Zayats, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Chirag Nagpal, Pete
Shaw, and Jonathan Berant. Robust preference optimization through reward model distillation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19316, 2024.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Zhaolin Gao, Jonathan D Chang, Wenhao Zhan, Owen Oertell, Gokul Swamy, Kianté Brantley,
Thorsten Joachims, J Andrew Bagnell, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Rebel: Reinforcement learning
via regressing relative rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16767, 2024a.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Zhaolin Gao, Wenhao Zhan, Jonathan D Chang, Gokul Swamy, Kianté Brantley, Jason D Lee, and
Wen Sun. Regressing the relative future: Efficient policy optimization for multi-turn rlhf. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.04612, 2024b.
Kurt Godel. Letter to john von neumann, 1956. URL https://ecommons.cornell.edu/
server/api/core/bitstreams/46aef9c4-288b-457d-ab3e-bb6cb1a4b88e/
content.
Suriya Gunasekar, Blake Woodworth, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Behnam Neyshabur, and Nathan Srebro.
Implicit regularization in matrix factorization, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.
09280.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre
Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. Direct language model alignment from online
ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792, 2024.
Audrey Huang, Adam Block, Dylan J Foster, Dhruv Rohatgi, Cyril Zhang, Max Simchowitz, Jor-
dan T Ash, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Self-improvement in language models: The sharpening
mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01951, 2024a.
Audrey Huang, Wenhao Zhan, Tengyang Xie, Jason D Lee, Wen Sun, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dy-
lan J Foster. Correcting the mythos of kl-regularization: Direct alignment without overoptimization
via chi-squared preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13399, 2024b.
HuggingFace. Online dpo trainer, 2024. URL https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/v0.
11.4/en/online_dpo_trainer.
Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
tional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, 2023.
Cassidy Laidlaw, Stuart J Russell, and Anca Dragan. Bridging rl theory and practice with the effective
horizon. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:58953–59007, 2023.
Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models
for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.
Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang Zhang. Algorithmic regularization in over-parameterized
matrix sensing and neural networks with quadratic activations. In Conference On Learning Theory,
pp. 2–47. PMLR, 2018.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Yong Lin, Skyler Seto, Maartje Ter Hoeve, Katherine Metcalf, Barry-John Theobald, Xuan Wang,
Yizhe Zhang, Chen Huang, and Tong Zhang. On the limited generalization capability of the implicit
reward model induced by direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03650, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Shenao Zhang, Boyi Liu, Hongyi Guo, Yingxiang Yang, Jose Blanchet,
and Zhaoran Wang. Provably mitigating overoptimization in rlhf: Your sft loss is implicitly an
adversarial regularizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16436, 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov, Frank Hutter, et al. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101, 5:5, 2017.
David JC MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university
press, 2003.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a reference-
free reward, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14734.
John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 7721–7735. PMLR, 2021.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain generalization
in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
and Experiment, 2021(12):124003, 2021.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, volume 1,
pp. 2, 2000.
Frank Nielsen. An elementary introduction to information geometry. Entropy, 22(10):1100, 2020.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
27730–27744, 2022.
Karl Popper. Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. routledge, 2014.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Rafael Rafailov, Joey Hejna, Ryan Park, and Chelsea Finn. From r to q: Your language model is
secretly a q-function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12358, 2024.
Nasim Rahaman, Aristide Baratin, Devansh Arpit, Felix Draxler, Min Lin, Fred A. Hamprecht,
Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. On the spectral bias of neural networks, 2019. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.08734.
Noam Razin, Zixuan Wang, Hubert Strauss, Stanley Wei, Jason D Lee, and Sanjeev Arora.
What makes a reward model a good teacher? an optimization perspective.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.15477, 2025.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
2011.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
John Schulman.
A compelling intuition is that deep learning does approximate solomonoff
induction„
December
2023.
URL
https://x.com/johnschulman2/status/
1741178475946602979.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Amrith Setlur, Nived Rajaraman, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling test-time compute without
verification or rl is suboptimal, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12118.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, and Eran Tromer. Using more data to speed-up training time. In
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1019–1027. PMLR, 2012.
Yuda Song, Gokul Swamy, Aarti Singh, Drew Bagnell, and Wen Sun. The importance of online data:
Understanding preference fine-tuning via coverage. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024a.
Yuda Song, Hanlin Zhang, Carson Eisenach, Sham Kakade, Dean Foster, and Udaya Ghai. Mind
the gap: Examining the self-improvement capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.02674, 2024b.
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The implicit
bias of gradient descent on separable data, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.
10345.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Hao Sun and Mihaela van der Schaar. Inverse-rlignment: Inverse reinforcement learning from
demonstrations for llm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15624, 2024.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Of moments and matching:
A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 10022–10032. PMLR, 2021.
Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A minimaxi-
malist approach to reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04056,
2024.
Fahim Tajwar, Anikait Singh, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Jeff Schneider, Tengyang Xie, Stefano
Ermon, Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Preference fine-tuning of llms should leverage suboptimal,
on-policy data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14367, 2024.
Yunhao Tang, Daniel Zhaohan Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Yuan Cao, Eugene Tarassov,
Rémi Munos, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Michal Valko, Yong Cheng, et al. Understanding the perfor-
mance gap between online and offline alignment algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08448,
2024.
Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett
Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal
understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
Vladimir N Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
events to their probabilities. In Measures of complexity: festschrift for alexey chervonenkis, pp.
11–30. Springer, 2015.
Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
grokking through circuit efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02390, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Haoxiang Wang, Wei Xiong, Tengyang Xie, Han Zhao, and Tong Zhang. Interpretable preferences
via multi-objective reward modeling and mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12845,
2024.
Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Bloesch, Nino Vieillard, Arun Ahuja, Jorg Bornschein, Sandy Huang,
Artem Sokolov, Matt Barnes, Guillaume Desjardins, Alex Bewley, et al. Imitating language
via scalable inverse reinforcement learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Violet Xiang, Charlie Snell, Kanishk Gandhi, Alon Albalak, Anikait Singh, Chase Blagden, Duy
Phung, Rafael Rafailov, Nathan Lile, Dakota Mahan, et al. Towards system 2 reasoning in llms:
Learning how to think with meta chain-of-though. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04682, 2025.
Teng Xiao, Yige Yuan, Mingxiao Li, Zhengyu Chen, and Vasant G Honavar. On a connection between
imitation learning and rlhf, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05079.
Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju Wang, Chao Yu,
and Yi Wu. Is dpo superior to ppo for llm alignment? a comprehensive study. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.10719, 2024.
Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Slic-hf:
Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425, 2023.
Hattie Zhou, Arwen Bradley, Etai Littwin, Noam Razin, Omid Saremi, Josh Susskind, Samy Bengio,
and Preetum Nakkiran. What algorithms can transformers learn? a study in length generalization,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16028.
Banghua Zhu, Evan Frick, Tianhao Wu, Hanlin Zhu, and Jiantao Jiao. Starling-7b: Improving llm
helpfulness & harmlessness with rlaif, 2023.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
A QUINTET OF HYPOTHESES FOR THE ONLINE-OFFLINE GAP
CONTENTS
A.1
H1: Intrinsic Value of Online Samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.2
H2: Failure of Offline PFT Regularization to πref . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.3
H3: Relative Ease of Online PFT Optimization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.4
H4: Global RMs Can Be Trained on More Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
A.5
H5: Global RMs Generalize Better OOD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
We now consider (and in some cases, falsify) a series of hypotheses, both from prior work and of our
own, that attempt to explain the discrepancy between §2’s theory and the reality of PFT in §3.
A.1
H1: INTRINSIC VALUE OF ONLINE SAMPLES.
Intuitively, it may seem as though getting feedback on samples from the policy is providing qualita-
tively new information from the fixed offline dataset. Tang et al. (2024) come to this conclusion.
However, it is not clear as to what, precisely, is the mechanism by which this on-policy data actually
helps with policy optimization when we account for the fact that the labels for this data are merely
imputed by a RM trained on the same off-policy dataset, rather than truly new information from some
ground-truth reward function. Put differently, there is no information in the RM that wasn’t either in
preference dataset or the (shared) base model, both of which the offline methods have access to.
Recall that from an information-theoretic perspective, we know on-policy data is redundant via the
data-processing inequality (MacKay, 2003) – we cannot create any new information (i.e., bona fide
human preferences) to learn from via sampling from the policy. Auto-regressive generation also
doesn’t get new information from a real environment. Furthermore, given the RM, one could in theory
run a (soft) value iteration procedure to compute the optimal policy without ever sampling on-policy,
meaning that on-policy samples are technically not necessary to solve the (soft) RL problem.
A.2
H2: FAILURE OF OFFLINE PFT REGULARIZATION TO πREF .
Via an elegant argument, Song et al. (2024a) prove that offline PFT algorithms like DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2023) and IPO (Azar et al., 2023) require global (i.e., stronger) preference dataset coverage
conditions than online PFT methods, as they are unable to effectively regularize to the reference
policy otherwise. Intuitively, this is because reverse KL regularization involves an expectation over
samples drawn from the learner’s policy. Thus, all generable trajectories need to be within the support
of the preference dataset for a purely offline algorithm to effectively control the reverse KL. A variety
of approaches, from sampling on-policy to directly calculate the reverse KL and adding it in as an
auxiliary loss term (Song et al., 2024a), to several forms of offline pessimism (Huang et al., 2024b;
Cen et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024) have been proposed to mitigate this issue.
While certainly a contributing factor, there are several pieces of evidence that imply this distinction
does not explain all of the gap in performance between online and offline approaches to PFT. First,
adding in a reverse KL penalty to DPO doesn’t completely close the gap to bona fide online PFT
methods (Song et al., 2024a; Gao et al., 2024a). Second, PFT methods that don’t explicitly regularize
to the prior like SimPO (Meng et al., 2024) have shown strong performance on multiple benchmarks.
Third, there are fine-tuning problems where staying close to the reference policy is not particularly
important for performance, and we still see online methods out-perform offline methods (Choudhury
& Sodhi, 2024). Lastly, all the experiments in Figure 3 use the same regularizer for both online and
offline algorithms, and we still observe a gap in performance. Thus, H2 fails to predict these results.
A.3
H3: RELATIVE EASE OF ONLINE PFT OPTIMIZATION.
One might ask if offline PFT is somehow faced with a harder optimization problem than online PFT
because the former is forced to escape extra local minima, as argued by Xu et al. (2024).
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
However, as we remarked above, because we use the same loss function (DPO’s) for both offline and
online PFT, the only difference between the procedures we’re comparing is the data we’re passing in.
It is unclear how the same number of online samples could make it easier to optimize the same loss
function – Xu et al. (2024) instead compare offline DPO to online PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
On.DPO
1.4B
On.DPO
1.4B
(aug.)
On.DPO
2.8B
On.DPO
2.8B
(aug.)
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
56.1
56.6
60.8
61.2
pythia prompt aug.
Figure 8: Augmenting the set of prompts we use for online
DPO with those from the SFT dataset (≈3x as much
data) barely improves winrate. This is contrary to what a
refinement of H3 predicts. Results across 3 training seeds.
A refinement of the above hypothesis is grounded in the phenomenon of computational-statistical
gaps: for certain problems, additional samples, even if information-theoretically redundant, reduce
the amount of computation required to find a solution (Daniely et al., 2013; Bandeira et al., 2018).
For example, filling in more of a Sudoku puzzle makes it easier to solve, even if we’ve already
observed the minimum set of numbers to uniquely specify the solution. One might therefore view the
(redundant) on-policy samples as providing these extra “constraints” on the policy search space.
To attempt to falsify this refined hypothesis, we perform prompt augmentation to increase the size
of the preference dataset D we use for training the online DPO policy. Specifically, we generate
on-policy and compute RM labels on prompts from the SFT dataset, nearly tripling the training set
size. Intuitively, if the refined hypothesis were true, we’d expect that we would see an increase in
policy performance with these “redundant” samples. However, in Figure 8, we instead observe almost
no improvement in downstream winrate, which the refined version of H3 fails to predict.
A.4
H4: GLOBAL RMS CAN BE TRAINED ON MORE DATA.
When we look at the most performant global reward models available (Zhu et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024; Lambert et al., 2024), we often observe that they are trained on a relatively wide distribution of
data compared to the preference datasets used for offline PFT. It is therefore a natural question as to
whether there is something intrinsic about global RMs that make them more amenable to training on
a wider distribution of data than local RMs / policies.4 In fact, the human preference data we use to
train our global RMs and policies is generated by a diverse assortment of comparisons from a wide
variety of policies (Stiennon et al., 2020), rather than just samples from our particular base policy.
To attempt to falsify this hypothesis, we generate a more concentrated dataset by using samples only
from the SFT policy, with winners picked by gpt-4o query. As we are reducing the diversity of the
preference dataset, H4 predicts that the gap between online and offline PFT would shrink.
DPO
On.DPO
(SFT)
On.DPO
(DPO)
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
56.8
58.8
65.2
pythia-1.4B gpt-labels
Figure 9: Performing an iteration of online DPO (third bar) on top
of offline DPO (first bar) significantly improves winrate, even when
all samples in D are generated by the SFT policy and labeled by
gpt-4o, a narrower preference dataset. This is contrary to what
H4 predicts. All results reported across 3 seeds.
In Figure 9, we see online DPO (third bar) on top of offline DPO (first bar) still significantly improving
performance, even though we train all models with a relatively narrow, on-policy dataset, which H4
fails to predict. We note that it is unsurprising that online DPO on top of the SFT policy (second bar)
roughly matches the performance of offline DPO (first bar) – the former procedure amounts to merely
relabeling the same SFT policy samples with the RM instead of the ground-truth gpt-4o labels.
4There is a O(H) computational speedup provided by not needing to do a per-token forward + backward
pass for global RMs as in local RM training, which could allow more data to be trained on with the same
computation budget. Howevever, we use the same amount of data for local/global RM training in all experiments.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Thus, while it is hard to argue that more (and more diverse) data wouldn’t lead to a better RM, we
don’t see evidence that policies and RMs would have different levels of efficacy of taking advantage
of this wider distribution of data, at least for the sorts of problems we consider in our work.
A.5
H5: GLOBAL RMS GENERALIZE BETTER OOD.
In their comprehensive empirical study, Tajwar et al. (2024) argue that when the peak of the learned
reward model falls outside of the support of the preference data, online PFT techniques are better
able to maximize this reward than offline approaches. Implicitly, such explanations are assuming that
reward models generalize better OOD than policies. Lin et al. (2024) observe that, empirically, the
reward model implied by DPO generalizes less well OOD than a standard, global reward model, a
perspective echoed by the top of the RewardBench leaderboard (Lambert et al., 2024). The work of
Chu et al. (2025) finds evidence of this phenomenon in vision-based reasoning tasks.
However, there are several open questions in the above story. First, given persistent concerns about
reward model over-optimization (Gao et al., 2023; Eisenstein et al., 2023), it seems that neither
policies nor RMs generalize all that well OOD in general. Second, it is not immediately clear why
policies and reward models that are trained from the same initial checkpoint on the same dataset (as
in the experiments in Fig. 3) should generalize differently OOD. Third, the comparison between DPO
RMs and standard global RMs changes two factors at once: DPO regularizes to the reference policy
(unlike unregularized global reward model training) and optimizes a local (rather than a global) RM.
We conduct a several experiments to provide answers to the preceding questions. To remove the
confounder of the reference, we also train local RMs without regularization (i.e., reference-less DPO),
which we refer to as Local. We note that this is precisely the ˆπmle (Eq. 9) we analyzed above.
DPO
1.4B
Local
1.4B
Global
1.4B
DPO
2.8B
Local
2.8B
Global
2.8B
0.526
0.567
0.593
0.545
0.598
0.610
RM Validation Likelihood (↑) on tl;dr
Figure 10: Going from a global RM to a local
RM or from a local RM to a DPO RM hampers
(in-distribution) validation accuracy. We report
results for all RMs across 3 seeds.
12
5
10
25
N
25
30
35
40
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-1.4B BoN: SFT
12
5
10
25
N
50
55
60
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-1.4B BoN: DPO
12
5
10
25
N
30
35
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-2.8B BoN: SFT
12
5
10
25
N
55
60
65
gpt-4o Winrate(↑)
pythia-2.8B BoN: DPO
Global
Local
DPO
Base
Figure 11: We compare global, local, and DPO reward models in terms of their BoN winrate as
a measure of OOD generalization. We use the same size for the policy and the reward model and
generate samples either from a base SFT or offline DPO policy. As we increase N, we see a perfect
correlation emerge between the in-distribution validation likelihood reported in Fig. 10 and BoN
performance. All standard errors are reported across three training seeds.
We first compare DPO, local, and global RMs of the same backbone in terms of their validation
likelihood (i.e., in terms of their in-distribution generalization when evaluated as classifiers). In
Figure 10, we consistently see that enforcing a token-wise decomposition leads to worse performance
in distribution. Furthermore, adding in regularization during training further hampers the hold-out
validation likelihood of the local RM. These results persist across multiple model sizes.
We next evaluate the OOD generalization (as in, not on samples from the same distribution as the
human preference dataset) of each of these families of models by evaluating their Best-Of-N (BoN)
performance on samples from both the SFT and offline DPO policies. Higher values of N correspond
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
to testing a reward model on a wider swathe of generations. In Figure 11, we see higher in-distribution
validation likelihood perfectly correlate with BoN performance for high enough N. 5
Better in-distribution margins are known to correlate with some kinds of OOD generalization (Miller
et al., 2021). Intuitively, by having a larger margin in-distribution, one hopes a classifier will be able
to better separate OOD samples, similar to classical arguments for SVMs. While this observation
provides a potential explanation for the better OOD performance reported in prior work, it merely
kicks the can down the road: we still haven’t explained why there should be a difference in-distribution
in the first place. Thus, while we don’t falsify H5, the root cause of the observed phenomena of global
reward models generalizing better than local reward models is still unclear, leaving a conceptual gap.
5The results where we sample from a DPO policy and further filter the samples with the internal DPO
RM and improve winrate are separately interesting as they provide evidence of self-improvement, echoing the
findings of Song et al. (2024b); Huang et al. (2024a). However, we note that an external global RM is still
significantly better at accurately ranking learner samples across the board.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
PROOFS.
CONTENTS
B.1
Proof of Lemma 2.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
B.1.1
Proof of Lemma 2.1 with Reference Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
B.2
Proof of Theorem 2.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
B.3
Proof of Theorem 2.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
B.4
Proof of Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
B.1
PROOF OF LEMMA 2.1
Proof.
π⋆= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r) = arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) −log(P⋆
r(ξ)))


= arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) −r(ξ) + log Z(r, s0))


= arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ)) −r(ξ))


= arg max
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(−log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) + r(ξ))


= arg max
π∈Π
Eξ∼π[r(ξ)] + H(π)
= π⋆
r.
B.1.1
PROOF OF LEMMA 2.1 WITH REFERENCE POLICY
Given two distributions P, Q ∈∆(Ξ), define their trajectory-level mixture P · Q as
(P · Q)(ξ) =
P(ξ)Q(ξ)
P
ξ′∈Ξ P(ξ′)Q(ξ′), ∀ξ ∈Ξ.
(13)
Lemma B.1 (MinRelEnt RL is an RKL Projection). Let r ∈R be a global reward model. Define
π⋆= arg minπ∈Π DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r · Pπref) as the trajectory-level reverse KL projection of the trajectory-
level mixture of P⋆
r and Pπref onto Π. Next, define π⋆
r as the soft-optimal policy computed by solving
π⋆
r = arg max
π∈Π
Eξ∼π[r(ξ)] −DKL(Pπ||Pπref).
(14)
Then, π⋆
r = π⋆.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Proof.
π⋆= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r · Pπref)
= arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) −log(P⋆
r(ξ)) −log(Pπref(ξ|s0)))


= arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) −r(ξ) + log Z(r, s0) −log(Pπref(ξ|s0)))


= arg min
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(log(Pπ(ξ)) −r(ξ) −log(Pπref(ξ|s0)))


= arg max
π∈Π
Es0∼ρ0

X
ξ∈Ξ|s0
Pπ(ξ|s0)(−log(Pπ(ξ|s0)) + r(ξ) + log(Pπref(ξ|s0)))


= arg max
π∈Π
Eξ∼π[r(ξ)] −DKL(Pπ||Pπref)
= π⋆
r.
B.2
PROOF OF THEOREM 2.2
Proof. Below, we use ˜πmle ∈ˆπmle and ˜rmle ∈ˆrmle to refer to specific minima of Eqs. 9 and 6.
First, we observe that because R = R(Π) and the fact that minimizing the same functional over the
same function class must produce the same set of minima, ˆrmle = R(ˆπmle). This further implies that
for each ˜πmle ∈ˆπmle, ∃˜rmle ∈ˆrmle such that ∀ξ ∈Ξ, r˜πmle(ξ) = ˜rmle(ξ) and vice-versa.
From Lemma 2.1, we know that each ˜πrlhf ∈ˆπrlhf can also be written as the minimizer of a reverse
KL projection:
˜πrlhf = arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
˜rmle)
= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r˜πmle)
= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P˜πmle)
= ˜πmle,
where the last step uses the fact that ˜πmle ∈Π. We can repeat the above steps for each ˜rmle ∈ˆrmle to
prove that ˆπrlhf = ˆπmle.
B.3
PROOF OF THEOREM 2.3
Proof. Below, we use ˜πmle ∈ˆπmle and ˜rmle ∈ˆrmle to refer to specific minima of Eqs. 9 and 6.
First, we observe that because R = R(Π) and the fact that minimizing the same functional over the
same function class must produce the same set of minima, ˆrmle = R(ˆπmle). This further implies that
for each ˜πmle ∈ˆπmle, ∃˜rmle ∈ˆrmle such that ∀ξ ∈Ξ, r˜πmle(ξ) = ˜rmle(ξ) and vice-versa.
Next, observe that for all datasets D and ∀˜π⋆
dpo ∈π⋆
dpo, ∃˜π⋆
mle ∈π⋆
mle such that ∀ξ ∈Ξ,
H
X
h
log ˜π⋆
dpo(ah|sh) =
H
X
h
log ˜π⋆
mle(ah|sh) + log πref(ah|sh).
(15)
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Next, because of our realizability assumptions (i.e. π⋆
mle, π⋆
dpo ⊂Π), we also know that ˆπmle = π⋆
mle
and ˆπdpo = π⋆
dpo. Put together, this tell us that ∀˜πdpo ∈ˆπdpo, ∃˜πmle ∈ˆπmle such that ∀ξ ∈Ξ,
H
X
h
log ˜πdpo(ah|sh) =
H
X
h
log ˜πmle(ah|sh) + log πref(ah|sh).
(16)
Then, substituting ˜rmle for the equivalent r˜πmle, we arrive at
H
X
h
log ˜πdpo(ah|sh) = ˜rmle(ξ) +
H
X
h
log πref(ah|sh).
(17)
This tells us that r˜πdpo = ˜rmle + r˜πref, and therefore P⋆
r˜πdpo = P⋆
˜rmle · Pπref. Next, from Lemma B.1, we
know that each ˜πrlhf ∈ˆπrlhf can also be written as the minimizer of a reverse KL projection:
˜πrlhf = arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
˜rmle · Pπref)
(18)
= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
r˜πdpo)
(19)
= arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P˜πdpo)
(20)
= ˜πdpo,
(21)
where the last step uses the fact that ˜πdpo ∈Π. We can repeat the above steps for each ˜rmle ∈ˆrmle to
prove that ˆπrlhf = ˆπdpo.
B.4
PROOF OF THEOREM 4.1
Proof. Below, we use ˜πsim ∈ˆπsim and ˜πrlhf ∈ˆπrlhf to refer to specific minima.
First, we observe that because of Lemma 2.1, we can write that
ˆπrlhf =

arg min
π∈Π
DKL(Pπ||P⋆
˜rsim)
˜rsim ∈ˆrsim

.
(22)
We can then combine the above with the fact that ˆrsim ⊂Rsim to conclude that ˆπrlhf ⊂Π(Rsim).
Now, we assume for the sake of contradiction that ∃˜πrlhf ∈ˆπrlhf such that ˜πrlhf /∈ˆπsim (i.e., ˜πrlhf is not
a BT likelihood maximizer over Π(Rsim)). Then, by the fact that ˜πrlhf ∈ˆπrlhf ⊂Π(Rsim) and the
definition of each ˜πsim ∈ˆπsim as a BT likelihood maximizer over Π(Rsim), it must be true that
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D
h
DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r˜πsim (ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))
i
< E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D
h
DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r˜πrlhf(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))
i
.
Then, because we assumed that ∀˜rsim ∈ˆrsim ⊂Rsim, π⋆
˜rsim ∈Π (i.e., the secondary RKL projection
is exact), it must then be true that ∃˜rsim ∈ˆrsim s.t. ˜πrlhf = π⋆
˜rsim, which further implies that
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D
h
DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r˜πrlhf(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))
i
= E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
rπ⋆
˜rsim
(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

= E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
˜rsim(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

.
Together, these imply that:
E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D
h
DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
r˜πsim(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))
i
< E(ξ1,ξ2)∼D

DKL(PD(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0)||PBT
˜rsim(ξ1 ≻ξ2|s0))

.
However, by our realizability assumption, we also know that ∀˜πsim ∈ˆπsim ⊂Π(Rsim), r˜πsim ∈Rsim.
Thus, this expression contradicts the definition of ˜rsim as a BT likelihood maximizer over Rsim.
In words, the realizability assumption of the above theorem is that the policy class Π includes all
policies that are soft-optimal for the relatively simple verifiers in Rsim, but not necessarily for all
verifiers in R. Thus, fully isomorphic classes implies but is not implied by this (weaker) assumption.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS.
CONTENTS
C.1
Dataset Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
C.1.1
Online DPO Dataset Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
C.2
Model Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
C.3
Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
C.4
Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Throughout all of our experiments, we use the tl;dr data from https://github.com/
openai/summarize-from-feedback, optimize models from the pythia family (Bider-
man et al., 2023), and build upon the codebase for REBEL (Gao et al., 2024a), available at
https://github.com/ZhaolinGao/REBEL. We use VLLM for fast inference (Kwon et al.,
2023). We will open-source the code, models, and data for this project upon paper acceptance.
C.1
DATASET DETAILS
For the standard summarization tasks (Figs. 3, 8, 10, 11, 4), our training data has the following
characteristics:
Table 1: Dataset split, prompts, and maximum generation length for TL;DR summarization
DATASET
TRAIN/VAL/TEST
PROMPT
GENERATION LENGTH
SFT
117K/6.45K/6.55K
“TL;DR:”
53
PFT
92.9K/83.8K/-
“TL;DR:”
53
As is standard practice, we first fine-tune the base pythia models on the SFT training set before
performing some variant of DPO on the PFT training set.
For the prompt augmentation results in Figure 8, we also use the prompts from the SFT training set
for on-policy generation.
For the “GPT-label” results in Figure 9, we sample twice from the SFT policy with temperature
0.1 and use the same prompting strategy we use for evaluation to pick a winner with gpt-4o. We
perform this procedure all PFT training prompts to generate a new training set.
For the two-word summarization results in Figure 5, we reduce the maximum generation length to 5
tokens as well as replacing “TL;DR:” with “Two-Word TL;DR:”. We use the following prompt to
generate a pair of two-word summaries via gpt-4o query:
Given the following forum post, please write a summary of the post
of length at most two words. The summaries should not include
any unimportant or irrelevant details.
### Post:
{{post}}
### Instructions:
Your response should use the format:
Summary: <two-word summary>
Do not include any other text or explanations in your response.
We use the same prompting strategy as for evaluation to pick a winner. We do this for all prompts in
the PFT training set.
For the ROUGE-L results in Figure 6, we rank 25 prompt completions sampled from the SFT policy
with temperature 0.1 on each of the PFT training prompts via the ROUGE-L F1 score against the
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
preferred prompt completion in the training set. We use the highest and lowest scoring generations
from the SFT policy as the preferred / dis-preferred completions.
C.1.1
ONLINE DPO DATASET DETAILS
The above discussion is on how we get the preference dataset we use for training reward models
and offline DPO policies. For online DPO, we sample from either the SFT or Offline DPO policy
25 times with temperature 0.1, rank the samples according to some kind of reward model, and use
the top and bottom of the list as the preferred and dis-preferred completions to the prompt for a new
training set. Also, unlike some implementations of online DPO (e.g. those in Gao et al. (2024a)), we
do not continuously sample from the policy and instead sample once from the initial policy across all
prompts in a “batched” fashion to reduce computational expense. This further aligns our online and
offline PFT implementations.
C.2
MODEL DETAILS
Across
all
experiments
in
this
paper,
we
use
the
pythia
series
of
mod-
els.
In
particular,
we
use
the
1.4B,
2.8B,
and
6.9B
parameter
de-duped
vari-
ants
available
at
https://huggingface.co/collections/EleutherAI/
pythia-scaling-suite-64fb5dfa8c21ebb3db7ad2e1 as our base models.
We
remove the final softmax and add in a single linear layer to transform a policy model into a global
reward model. We train all policies and reward models ourselves and do not use LoRA anywhere.
We train SFT models via 1 epoch over the SFT dataset. We the further fine-tune these models via one
epoch of training on the PFT data to create local and global reward models. We also only perform
one epoch of training for DPO on the PFT data, except for the results marked as DPO (2x) in Figs.
3 and 6. We use a mixture of A100s, A800s, and H100s across experiments. No training run took
more than 8 hours.
C.3
TRAINING DETAILS
We only run three training algorithms in this paper: logistic regression for global reward model
training, SFT and online/offline DPO. We use consistent hyperparameters for both of these procedures
across all experiments in this paper. We use AdamW (Loshchilov et al., 2017) for all optimization in
this paper.
PARAMETER
VALUE
BATCH SIZE
64
LEARNING RATE
3E-6
ε
1E-5
SCHEDULE
COSINE DECAY
Table 2: Hyperparameters for global RM training.
PARAMETER
VALUE
BATCH SIZE
128
LEARNING RATE
3E-7
ε
1E-5
β
0.05
SCHEDULE
LINEAR DECAY
Table 3:
Hyperparameters for DPO training. We found a relatively low learning rate lead to
significantly better performance for DPO across the board. For offline DPO, we set πref = πsft. For
online DPO, we set πref to whatever generated the training data (i.e. either πsft or πdpo depending on
the experiment) and scale logits by the inverse of the sampling temperature
1
0.1 = 10 before taking
the softmax, as is standard practice.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
PARAMETER VALUE
β
1
H =
1
53
Table 4: Hyperparameters for local reward model training that differ from those for DPO. There is
no πref for local RMs.
C.4
EVALUATION DETAILS
We sample with temperature 0.01 for all winrate / ROUGE-L policy evaluations. We use temperature
0.1 for all BoN results.
For all winrate computations, we use gpt-4o. For standard summarization, we use the following
prompt:
Which of the following summaries does a better job of summarizing
the most important points in the given forum post, without
including unimportant or irrelevant details? Judge based on
accuracy, coverage, and coherence.
### Post:
{{post}}
### Summary A:
{{summarya}}
### Summary B:
{{summaryb}}
### Instructions:
FIRST provide a one-sentence comparison of the two summaries,
explaining which \
you prefer and why. SECOND, on a new line, state only "A" or "B"
to indicate your choice. Your response should use the format:
Comparison: <one-sentence comparison and explanation>
Preferred: <"A" or "B">
We use 600 randomly sampled prompts from the SFT test set for evaluation.
For two-word summarization (i.e. Fig 5) we use the following prompt:
Which of the following two-word summaries does a better job of
summarizing the most important points in the given forum post,
without including unimportant or irrelevant details? Judge
based on accuracy, coverage, and coherence.
### Post:
{{post}}
### Summary A:
{{summarya}}
### Summary B:
{{summaryb}}
### Instructions:
FIRST provide a one-sentence comparison of the two summaries,
explaining which \
you prefer and why. SECOND, on a new line, state only "A" or "B"
to indicate your choice. Your response should use the format:
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Comparison: <one-sentence comparison and explanation>
Preferred: <"A" or "B">
We use 6000 randomly sampled prompts from the SFT test set for evaluation.
For ROUGE-L evaluations (i.e. Fig. 6), we use the F1 variant of the metric against preferred
completions from the PFT validation set.
For likelihood evaluations, we use the appropriate validation loss for the model class. For global
reward models, this is just logistic loss. For DPO reward models, this includes the scaling factor β
and the reference policy probabilities. For local reward models, this includes just the scaling factor β.
27