--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
DMAP: A DISTRIBUTION MAP FOR TEXT
Tom Kempton∗
University of Manchester, UK
thomas.kempton@manchester.ac.uk
Julia Rozanova, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Maeve Madigan
Risk and Security AI Lab, Visa Inc., UK
{yrozanov,kaparame,mmadigan}@visa.com
Karolina Wresilo∗, Yoann Launay∗
University of Cambridge, UK
kwresilo@hep.phy.cam.ac.uk, yl844@cam.ac.uk
David Sutton & Stuart Burrell
Risk and Security AI Lab, Visa Inc., UK
{dsutton,sburrell}@visa.com
ABSTRACT
Large Language Models (LLMs) are a powerful tool for statistical text analysis,
with derived sequences of next-token probability distributions offering a wealth of
information. Extracting this signal typically relies on metrics such as perplexity,
which do not adequately account for context; how one should interpret a given
next-token probability is dependent on the number of reasonable choices encoded
by the shape of the conditional distribution. In this work, we present DMAP, a
mathematically grounded method that maps a text, via a language model, to a set
of samples in the unit interval that jointly encode rank and probability informa-
tion. This representation enables efficient, model-agnostic analysis and supports
a range of applications. We illustrate its utility through three case studies: (i) val-
idation of generation parameters to ensure data integrity, (ii) examining the role
of probability curvature in machine-generated text detection, and (iii) a forensic
analysis revealing statistical fingerprints left in downstream models that have been
subject to post-training on synthetic data. Our results demonstrate that DMAP of-
fers a unified statistical view of text that is simple to compute on consumer hard-
ware, widely applicable, and provides a foundation for further research into text
analysis with LLMs.
1
INTRODUCTION
A language model p provides a wealth of information about a text w = (w1 · · · wT ) through the
sequence of next-token probability distributions p(·|w1 · · · wi−1). We ask how to use this informa-
tion to learn something about the text w or the language model p. To date, most efforts that use a
language model to report statistical properties of a text use metrics that measure how unexpected
each token is under p. A standard such metric is the average log-likelihood of each observed token,
1
T
T
X
i=1
log p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1),
while a related but coarser variant, log-rank, replaces p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) with the ordinal rank
r(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) of the observed token in the descending list of next token probabilities. Perplexity
is the exponential of the negative average per-token log probability.
∗Work completed while at Featurespace, a Visa Solution.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 1: The DMAP algorithm. Given a text w of length T, this diagram illustrates how DMAP
generates a collection of samples x1 · · · xT in [0, 1]. These may be analyzed quantitatively with
statistical tests or qualitatively by splitting [0, 1] into equal sized bins and plotting a histogram,
as illustrated in Figure 2. We initialize i = 1. Our experiments demonstrate these visualizations
identify decoding parameters (top-p, top-k, temperature), yield insights into black box machine-
generated text detection algorithms based on probability curvature, and reveal statistical fingerprints
left by performing supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on synthetic data.
Log-likelihood, log-rank and perplexity have been widely used in the training, evaluation, and de-
tection of language models. For example, a body of work seeks to use perplexity to predict the
readability of texts (Trott & Rivi`ere, 2024), and to use the strength of the correlation between per-
plexity and human reading time as a measure of the quality of a language model (Oh & Schuler,
2023). However, in some settings these metrics are problematic (Meister & Cotterell, 2021; Fang
et al., 2024), and often require contextualization to be useful.
In this work we use contextualization to describe the process of interpreting a raw statistic of a text
(such as per-token log-likelihood) in terms of the content of the text. At the broadest level, one can
give better answers to questions such as ‘is a per-token log-likelihood score of 4 unusually high?’
if one knows whether the text under consideration is a factual essay about chemistry or a piece of
creative writing. A finer-grained approach is to compare the log-likelihood of a token present in a
text to the expected log-likelihood of alternative tokens randomly sampled from a language model.
The crux of the contextualization problem is that the way one should interpret a token wi being
the third most likely, or having model probability 0.1, depends on the number of reasonable token
choices. These differences, encoded by the shape of the conditional distributions, are prone to persist
over long passages of text.
Recently, a body of work initiated by DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023) has tried to use a language
model p to address the contextualization problem and extract more nuanced information from next
token probability distributions in the context of machine-generated text detection (Bao et al., 2023;
Su et al., 2023; Hans et al., 2024). Inspired by these ideas, we introduce a distribution map, DMAP,
which is statistically rigorous and lends itself better to visualization. In essence, DMAP is a recipe
for mapping a text w onto a density function f : [0, 1] →R+ that encodes information about both
rank and perplexity in a principled way. As we shall see, this addresses the contextualization problem
and provides a simple yet surprisingly powerful mathematical lens through which to measure and
compare texts.
Contributions
1. Introduce the DMAP Algorithm. We introduce DMAP, a simple method to represent a
text w through a language model p as a set of samples in [0, 1] that jointly encode rank
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
and probability information. DMAP is open-sourced1, computationally efficient, and can
be applied effectively on consumer hardware with small models such as OPT-125m (Zhang
et al., 2022).
2. Demonstrate Applications of DMAP.
(a) Validate generation parameters. Detecting incorrect or inconsistent generation set-
tings in published data, such as top-k, top-p, temperature, or the language model itself.
(b) Design machine-generated text detectors. Using DMAP, we identify design weak-
nesses of existing zero-shot detectors based on probability curvature and propose al-
ternative principles for detector design.
(c) Reveal statistical signatures of post-training data in instruction-tuned models.
We investigate overconfidence in instruction-tuned models using DMAP and reveal
alignment between downstream generated text distributions and fine-tuning datasets,
even without access to internal model probabilities for the generating model.
We expect that the strengths of DMAP in statistical rigor and convenient visualization will see it
find many applications beyond these.
2
RELATED WORK
The Probability Integral Transform.
The probability integral transform (PIT, Fisher 1928) was
introduced as a method for mapping a continuous probability distribution on the real line onto the
uniform distribution on [0, 1], and as such is similar in philosophy to DMAP. One could combine
PIT with the distributional transform to deal with non-continuous random variables, this corresponds
exactly to our step of sampling from the uniform distribution on Ii. However, it only makes sense
to use PIT with categorical variables if one has a natural ordering of the categorical variables, and
if the bias which one is hoping to detect presents itself in terms of this ordering. While we have
framed our work as turning log-rank into a statistically useful measure, one could instead think of
DMAP as applying PIT and the distributional transform to the case of texts generated by language
models, but with a crucial additional step of dynamic re-ordering tokens by model probability.
Text Visualization.
GLTR (Gehrmann et al., 2019) introduced a tool to color-code text according
to token rank. This is an effective visualization, but inherits the issues of rank as a crude measure of
where a token sits in the probability distribution. Our DMAP framework extends this visualization
paradigm by providing a continuous, mathematically grounded representation that preserves both
rank and probability information while enabling statistical inference.
Machine-Generated Text Detection.
Several key approaches have emerged to address the so-
cially pertinent problem of detecting machine-generated text. DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023)
pioneered the use of probability curvature, measuring how perturbing a text affects its likelihood
under a language model. This approach was refined by DetectLLM (Su et al., 2023), who adapted
DetectGPT to use rank information, rather than exact probabilities. FastDetectGPT (Bao et al., 2023)
addressed efficiency issues related to perturbation and the contextualization problem by normaliz-
ing probability distributions at each step. More recently, Binoculars (Hans et al., 2024) proposed
a promising cross-model approach using probability ratios, though the theoretical justification for
their normalization scheme remains unclear. Unlike these approaches, DMAP does not directly
address the text detection problem. Instead, it provides a unified statistical framework that maps
probability information to a standardized representation, enabling broader text analysis applications
such as informing the design of future detectors.
Model Calibration and Overconfidence.
Recent work has identified systematic overconfidence
in instruction-tuned language models. Luo et al. (2025) demonstrated that alignment procedures
can degrade calibration, while Shen et al. (2024) proposed temperature scaling methods for post-
hoc calibration. Chhikara (2025) investigated the relationship between alignment objectives and
confidence estimation, and Zhu et al. (2023) analyzed calibration across different model scales.
Yang & Holtzman (2025) explored how alignment training affects uncertainty quantification. DMAP
1https://github.com/Featurespace/dmap.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
contributes to this literature by providing a tool to visualize and quantify distributional changes
induced by post-training procedures, revealing statistical fingerprints that persist in downstream
model behavior.
The key distinction of DMAP is its ability to map arbitrary probability distributions to a standardized
unit interval representation, enabling both intuitive visualization and rigorous statistical analysis
while addressing the fundamental contextualization challenges that limit existing approaches based
on surprisal metrics.
3
DMAP: A DISTRIBUTION MAP FOR TEXT
3.1
DEFINING DMAP
Let p be a language model, which we call the evaluator model, and let w = w1 · · · wT be a text with
tokens wi belonging to a vocabulary V . For each sequence position i ∈{1, · · · , T}, the candidate
tokens v ∈V can be ordered by decreasing probability p(v | w1 · · · wi−1). We construct a sequence
of points x1 · · · xT ∈[0, 1]T referred to as a DMAP sample as follows, see Figure 1 for an overview.
Given a text w1 · · · wT and an index i ∈{1, · · · , T}, DMAP works by first defining an inter-
val Ii and then sampling a point xi from the uniform distribution on Ii.
If wi is judged by
the language model p to be the most likely token to follow w1 · · · wi−1, the interval Ii will be
[0, p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)]. More generally, Ii is the interval of length p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) whose left end
point ai is the total mass of the set of tokens judged more likely by the language model.
Formally, let
V +
i
:= {v ∈V : p(v|w1 · · · wi−1) > p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)}
be the set of tokens judged by p to be more likely than wi to appear next in the sequence.
Now, define two points ai and bi by
ai :=
X
v∈V +
i
p(v|w1 · · · wi−1),
and bi := ai + p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1).
Finally, define the interval Ii ⊂[0, 1] by Ii := [ai, bi] and, for each i, let xi = D(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)
be chosen by sampling from the uniform distribution U(ai, bi) on Ii, yielding the desired sequence
x1 · · · xT . In practice, to visualize the resulting set of samples xi we split the unit interval [0, 1] into
k equally-sized bins and plot the resulting histogram. For the plots in this article we use k = 40.
Other quantitative and qualitative measures of the set {xi}i may be informative and we leave this
for future work.
In the following proposition, pure sampling from language model p refers to the practice of autore-
gressively generating a sequence w1 · · · wT by, at each step i, selecting token wi with probability
p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1). We later also consider top-k, nucleus and temperature sampling, see Section B
for definitions.
Proposition 3.1. When generating a text w1 · · · wT by pure sampling from language model p, the
corresponding sequence x1 · · · xT obtained by applying DMAP to w1 · · · wT with evaluator model
p will be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according to the uniform measure on [0, 1].
Proof. See Appendix A.
This proposition is particularly useful in Section 5.1, since the i.i.d. structure of the sequence
x1 · · · xT allows one to use off the shelf results about convergence rates. In particular, it allows
one to compute the chi-squared statistic of the distribution of the set of points {x1, · · · , xT }, uncov-
ering errors in the process of text generation with a high degree of confidence.
We can also use DMAP to visualize texts using an evaluator language model modified by a de-
coding strategy such as top-k, top-p or temperature sampling. For example, to see how w1 · · · wT
looks to language model p at temperature τ, one simply needs to replace the next token probabil-
ities p(v|w1 · · · wi−1) with the probabilities q(v|w1 · · · wi−1) resulting from sampling from p with
temperature τ. Proposition 3.1 continues to apply; see Appendix A.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.2
DEFINING ENTROPY-WEIGHTED DMAP
There are two practical issues with the definition of DMAP in Section 3.1. First, there is randomness
in the selection of xi from Ii that introduces noise and makes DMAP non-deterministic. Second,
if the language model p has high certainty about the choice of next token, then a choice of xi
contains little useful information and we should assign less weight to this choice of xi. We present
an alternative version of DMAP that mitigates these shortcomings by removing this randomness and
weighting the outcome of each token by the entropy of the next token probability distribution. A
version of Proposition 3.1 continues to hold, see Appendix A. In Appendix F we make DMAP plots
restricted to times where the next-token probability distribution has low entropy, and see that these
plots contain little useful information, justifying our deweighting of these points.
In broad terms, our map ˆD defined below makes two changes to DMAP. Firstly, rather than weight-
ing each sample equally, we use the entropy of the next-token probability distribution to weight each
sample point, up to a chosen maximum clipped weighting of λ for stability. Secondly, we mitigate
the randomness in the selection of xi and, instead of considering the (weighted) proportion of sam-
ples in each bin, we plot the expectation of this, removing the randomness. A precise mathematical
description goes as follows.
Given a language model p and a text w1 · · · wT , generate the sequence of intervals I1 · · · IT as with
DMAP. Also, compute h1 · · · hT where
hi := −
X
v∈V
p(v|w1 · · · wi−1) log p(v|w1 · · · wi−1)
is the entropy of the probability distribution p(·|w1 · · · wi−1). Let h′
i := min{hi, λ} and return the
function ˆD(w) : [0, 1] →R given by
ˆD(w) = ˆD(w1 · · · wT , p) :=
PT
i=1 h′
i
χIi
|Ii|
PT
i=1 h′
i
,
where χIi is the characteristic function equal to 1 on Ii and 0 elsewhere, and |Ii| is the length of
interval Ii. This gives that χIi/|Ii| is the function of integral 1 taking value 0 outside of Ii and
constant value on Ii. Thus, ˆD is a step function of integral one supported on [0, 1]. Finally, we may
make an entropy-weighted DMAP plot by splitting the unit interval into, for example, k = 40 bins
and averaging the value of ˆD over each bin. Since the entropy is potentially very large, in practice
we recommend clipping it at λ = 2 for stability.
The entropy hi can be viewed as the expected information obtained by revealing the next token wi.
Therefore, entropy-weighting places more weight on the times when the choice of next token is
more uncertain, and so we have more to learn. This amplifies the differences between our output
distribution and the uniform distribution at [0, 1], by reducing the weight associated with times i
where the next token is known with extremely high probability, making DMAP a more sensitive
tool. Hereafter, we use entropy-weighted DMAP unless otherwise specified. See Appendix F for
more information on entropy-weighting.
3.3
INTERPRETING DMAP VISUALIZATIONS
DMAP samples may be analyzed quantitatively, as in the χ2 tests of Section 5.1, or qualitatively
via simple histograms. These visualizations reveal whether certain portions of the model next-token
probability distribution are systematically over- or underrepresented in the text. Three particularly
common behaviors that we observe are: Head Bias (e.g. Figure 2 (c)) - tokens viewed as likely by
the evaluator model are over-represented in the text. Tail Bias (e.g. Figure 2 (f)) - tokens viewed as
unlikely by the evaluator model are over-represented in the text. Text generated by one base model
and evaluated by another base model with a similar entropy will typically display this behavior. Tail
Collapse (e.g. Figure 2 (e)) - a small portion at the bottom of the evaluator model distribution is
strongly under-represented in the text. Often seen in human-written text, this is consistent with the
folklore intuition that model distributions place too much weight on tokens which are not realistic,
an oft-cited motivation for top-p (nucleus) sampling.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: Illustrative DMAP histograms. The first row shows plots of XSum data (Narayan et al.,
2018) generated by OPT-125m, evaluated by OPT-125m. The generation strategies (left to right)
are (a) pure sampling, (b) top-p = 0.8 sampling, (c) temperature τ = 0.8 sampling, and (d) top-
k = 50. The second row shows various different types of text evaluated by DMAP: (e) a news
dataset of human text from RAID, (f) text generated by Mistral 7B (Albert Q. Jiang and others, 2023)
using pure sampling (top-p=1), (g) text generated by Mistral 7B Instruct, and (h) text generated by
ChatGPT from the Ghostbusters dataset (Verma et al., 2024). OPT-125m was used as the scoring
model to generate DMAP samples. See Appendix N for examples with larger evaluation models.
4
ILLUSTRATIVE VISUALIZATIONS FROM DMAP
This section takes a first look at some histogram plots from ˆD. We take text from different sources,
both human and machine, and evaluate them using OPT-125m as recommended by Mireshghallah
et al. (2024). This evaluator demonstrates DMAP can be run effectively on consumer hardware in a
few minutes. Throughout, we run DMAP over 300 texts each of around 300 tokens.
The top row of Figure 2 considers the case where the language model used to generate the texts is
also used to generate the DMAP plot. We consider pure sampling (a), where token wi is selected at
time i according to its model likelihood p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1), along with top-p (nucleus) (b), tempera-
ture (c), and top-k (d) sampling. See Appendix B for an explanation of these decoding strategies. As
predicted in Proposition 3.1, the DMAP plot from pure-sampled text with the same generator and
evaluator language models is close to the uniform distribution. Temperature, top-p and top-k sam-
pling are methods for increasing the probability of sampling from the head of the model distribution,
corresponding to the left side of a DMAP histogram. They each produce head-biased DMAP plots
with a highly characteristic shape. In particular, the plot for top-p sampling is flat on [0, π] before
rapidly dropping off, and the plot for top-k sampling is flat on roughly the first half of the interval
before smoothly dropping off. These shapes can be explained in terms of the statistics of the space
of conditional probability distributions; see Appendix B.
In the bottom row of Figure 2 we produce DMAP plots for text generated in various ways. Two
things can be seen in the distribution of human-written text (e). The distribution generally shows
that human-written tokens are somewhat surprising to OPT-125m. However, there is a sharp drop
off on the very right hand side of the distribution, reflecting the fact that the bottom five percent
of the OPT-125m distribution places too much weight on tokens which are not representative of
human writing. This drop-off is much less pronounced when using more modern language models
as detectors. Several other phenomena are easy to observe. Text generated by Mistral 7B (a base
model) and evaluated by OPT-125m (f) is tail-biased. This means, on average, Mistral 7B generated
text is surprising to OPT-125m. This phenomena should be expected when evaluating base models,
see Section C, and is repeated when Mistral (Albert Q. Jiang and others, 2023), Falcon (Ebtesam
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 3: Quantitative validation of decoding parameters. (a) shows a DMAP plot for the black-
box case of Llama 3.1 8B generated text evaluated by Mistral 7B. (b) shows a DMAP plot for the
white-box case of Llama 3.1 8B generated text evaluated by Llama 3.1 8B. (c) plots the log10 p-
values resulting from our χ2 uniformity test. This demonstrates how quantitative evidence can be
extracted from DMAP samples to investigate hypotheses about possible generation strategies. For
example, (c) tells us that after evaluating 10000 tokens of Llama generated text with Mistral-7B
as the evaluation model, the probability that Mistral would produce text with such an extreme χ2
distribution is less than 10−10. We can conclude that it is not plausible that the text under review
was generated by pure sampling from Mistral 7B.
Almazrouei and others, 2023) and Llama 3.1 8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024) look at the text generated
by one another, see Figures 8 and 9. In contrast to text generated by base models, text generated
by instruction-tuned models Mistral-Instruct (g) and ChatGPT (h) is head-biased; on average these
models are much more likely to pick tokens that are unsurprising to OPT. One might speculate that
something in the post-training regime has profoundly altered the language model distribution. We
study this question in more detail in Section 5.3.
5
APPLICATIONS
This section contains three example applications of DMAP, though we anticipate further use cases.
5.1
VALIDATING GENERATION PARAMETERS
Research claims in natural language processing are often sensitive to the precise decoding param-
eters used to generate text, see Section 5.2. Therefore, when generating text, or using publicly
available samples, it is crucial to be able to validate the reported language model and generation
hyperparameters such as top-p, top-k, or temperature.
For example, using DMAP, we discovered a major data-error affecting most of the top papers in
zero-shot machine-generated text detection (Mitchell et al., 2023; Su et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2023;
Hans et al., 2024; Dugan et al., 2024). At the time of their writing, HuggingFace enabled top-k by
default with k = 50, making it very easy for researchers to innocently and accidentally leave top-k
enabled while reporting that experiments were run on texts generated with pure sampling. Further
works such as Dubois et al. (2025) use texts generated by other papers where the error was present.
In this section, we present how DMAP may be used as a qualitative or quantitative tool to help
researchers validate their data to prevent such occurrences.
Qualitative Validation.
DMAP is an easy method for visually checking the integrity of machine-
generated text for open-weight models. When text is claimed to be generated by pure sampling,
Proposition 3.1 proves that the DMAP samples should be approximately uniformly distributed. Text
generated by a given decoding strategy is clearly identified from the DMAP plots, see Figure 2.
Alternatively, to test a specific combination of decoding parameters, we could test whether a uniform
distribution is recovered when modifying DMAP to use the probability measure q arising from
sampling from p with the specified decoding strategy.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Quantitative Validation.
To go beyond a visual check, we have the following method for deter-
mining the consistency of the data with a reported generation method. Firstly, DMAP is applied to
generate points x1 · · · xT , adapted for the parameter settings, for example, by multiplying logits by
1/τ for temperature sampling at temperature τ. Next, the unit interval is divided into k equal-sized
bins, and frequencies f1 · · · fk computed, where
fi = #{j ∈{1, · · · T} : i−1
k
≤xj < i
k}
T
.
We follow the Terrell-Scott rule (Terrell & Scott, 1985) for choosing the number of bins, letting
k = (2T)
1
3 and compute the χ2 statistic
χ2 = Tk
k
X
i=1

fi −1
k
2
.
We then compute the probability that text generated by the reported generation method would have
such an extreme χ2 statistic. This p-value determines the consistency of the text with the reported
generation method, see Figure 3 and Appendix D for further details, and Goodman (2008) for guid-
ance on the interpretation of p-values for this test.
5.2
DESIGNING METHODS TO DETECT MACHINE-GENERATED TEXT
This section describes how to use DMAP to gain insight into differences between human- and
machine-generated text, and what conclusions can be drawn on the performance of current detec-
tors and the design of future detectors. This is pertinent since, as discussed in Section 5.1, there
are data errors in a substantial portion of the research on the detection of machine-generated text.
Consequently, we discover that the principles underlying the design of many AI text detectors are
not universally true, the primary being the probability curvature thesis. Other observations for the
interested reader are provided in Appendix L.
5.2.1
PROBABILITY CURVATURE FOR BASE AND INSTRUCTION-TUNED MODELS
The main idea behind most statistical approaches to detecting machine-generated text is that humans
tend to choose words from further down the probability distribution than machines do. This idea
was presented as probability curvature in DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023), and the approach was
broadly followed in DetectLLM (Su et al., 2023), Fast-DetectGPT (Bao et al., 2023), and Binoculars
(Hans et al., 2024).
Probability curvature is effective in detecting text generated by an instruction-tuned model, or a
sampling strategy that weights text generation towards the head of the distribution. However, the
probability curvature idea is not supported by DMAP plots when pure sampling is used; in the
white box case, Figure 2 (a) and (e), it is much weaker than previously reported and in the black
box case, Figure 23, it appears false. To further validate this claim, we rerun experiments on the
efficacy of DetectGPT, Fast-DetectGPT and Binoculars in the black box detection setting. When
top-k sampling is used the detectors remain effective as previously reported, since this decoding
strategy impacts probability curvature as expected by the methods. However, Table 1 shows that
when pure sampling is used their performance is worse than a coin toss due to inversion of the
probability curvature. While an AUROC under 0.5 may suggest inverting classifications on either
side of the threshold, this is not possible here due to the zero-shot nature of these techniques: the
fixed directionality is dictated by the method and based on the probability curvature thesis.
Table 1 shows that base models present an acute vulnerability to current detectors based on prob-
ability curvature. Fortunately, typical users will use instruction-tuned models which often exhibit
head-bias as shown in Figure 2. However, new methods are required to prevent a determined ad-
versary bypassing existing detectors through the use of base models with careful prompting. In
addition, despite enterprise detectors most often being exposed to text from instruction-tuned mod-
els, the vast majority of the existing literature performs experiments on base models. Our results
show these two classes of models should be tested separately when researchers are designing and
validating future detection algorithms. Further experimental details may be found in Appendix J.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: Performance comparison across different machine-generated text black box detection meth-
ods, language models, and datasets (XSum (Narayan et al., 2018), SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
and WritingPrompts (Writing, Fan et al. 2018)). Results are shown for two sampling configurations:
top-k = 50 and pure sampling (top-k = None). As predicted by DMAP, state-of-the-art detectors
based on ‘probability curvature’ are effective when top-k sampling is used but not with pure sampled
text.
Method
Model
XSum
SQuAD
Writing
k = 50
k = None k = 50
k = None
k = 50
k = None
FAST-DETECTGPT
Llama-3.1-8B
0.702
0.200
0.739
0.208
0.915
0.289
Mistral-7B-v0.3
0.770
0.276
0.819
0.299
0.906
0.339
Qwen3-8B
0.765
0.289
0.612
0.320
0.923
0.377
DETECTGPT
Llama-3.1-8B
0.606
0.408
0.527
0.299
0.723
0.422
Mistral-7B-v0.3
0.679
0.486
0.586
0.365
0.688
0.457
Qwen3-8B
0.635
0.445
0.463
0.380
0.724
0.479
BINOCULARS
Llama-3.1-8B
0.825
0.325
0.849
0.365
0.942
0.410
Mistral-7B-v0.3
0.823
0.350
0.851
0.416
0.931
0.404
Qwen3-8B
0.857
0.416
0.752
0.467
0.949
0.492
5.3
STATISTICAL SIGNATURES OF POST-TRAINING DATA IN INSTRUCTION-TUNED MODELS
This section studies the effect of instruction fine-tuning on DMAP plots. In Figure 2 we saw that two
instruction tuned models, ChatGPT and Mistral Instruct, systematically over-sample from the head
of the OPT-125m probability distribution, whereas the non-instruction tuned base model Mistral 7B
is tail-biased. This tail-biased behavior of the base model is understood and expected (see Appendix
C). The real question is what is causing instruction tuned models to systematically over-select from
tokens which OPT-125m finds likely?
It has previously been noted (Luo et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2024; Chhikara, 2025; Zhu et al., 2023;
Yang & Holtzman, 2025) that instruction-tuned models are over-confident, in the sense that when
answering questions they assign too much weight to answers they believe are likely correct. We
hypothesize this may be an explanation for what we observe in our head-biased DMAP plots that
place too much weight on likely tokens at the head of the distribution.
DMAP plots provide an indirect method for studying model overconfidence by checking for this
head-bias in DMAP samples. We analyze whether this bias is present in the training data, the base
model, and the corresponding fine-tuned model, thereby shedding light on how biases in training
data may propagate to downstream model generations. This analysis is particularly relevant given
the common practice of using temperature-sampled responses as fine-tuning data (Dubois et al.,
2023).
We fine-tuned two sizes of Pythia models (Biderman et al., 2023) on the OASST2 dataset (K¨opf
et al., 2023) with responses provided by humans, Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 1, and Llama 3.1 8B
at temperature 0.7. Figure 4 contains DMAP plots for texts generated by Pythia 1B with four fine-
tuning configurations. For experimental details, DMAP plots for the fine-tuning data, and repeated
results on the other model, see Appendix K.
Our main finding is that the only head-biased model was the one fine-tuned on temperature-sampled
data, which was in turn the most head-biased fine-tuning data. We also see that human-written
instruction fine-tuned data has a dramatic tail-collapse, much larger than seen in other human-written
text. In addition, we see increased density in the final bin for fine-tuned models, which might
demonstrate how DMAP could be used to detect mild overfitting during SFT and inform early-
stopping strategies, a hypothesis we leave to explore further in future work. Finally, we note that
all of our instruction-tuned models had a less tail-biased distribution than the original Pythia model.
These initial experiments point to the utility of DMAP in studying how instruction-tuning affects
the distributional properties of machine text produced by downstream models.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 4: Using DMAP to investigate the effect of SFT post-training on synthetic data. DMAP plots
generated with the evaluator model (OPT-125m) on text generated by Pythia 1B models with (a) no
fine-tuning, (b) fine-tuned on OASST2 human data (K¨opf et al., 2023), (c) fine-tuned on OASST2
with responses regenerated by Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 0.7, and (d) fine-tuned on OASST2 with
responses regenerated by Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 1.0.
6
CONCLUSION
We introduced DMAP, a mathematically principled method for mapping text through language mod-
els to a standardized statistical representation. DMAP addresses the fundamental contextualization
problem that has limited previous approaches to statistical text analysis with language models. Three
initial case studies demonstrate the broad utility of this tool. Through parameter validation, we
demonstrate how DMAP can validate data integrity, helping to prevent natural and inevitable hu-
man errors propagating through the research ecosystem. Our re-examination of detection methods
showed that the widely-accepted probability curvature principle fails for pure sampling from base
models, challenging foundational assumptions in the field and pointing towards principles for de-
signing more robust detection strategies. Importantly, our experiments highlight that existing detec-
tors are critically vulnerable to adversarial attacks using base models with pure sampling in the black
box setting due to inversion of the expected curvature. Finally, our analysis of instruction-tuned
models reveals how statistical fingerprints of training data persist in downstream model outputs,
providing new insights into the sources of overconfidence in aligned models.
Beyond these specific applications, DMAP offers several key advantages: it is computationally effi-
cient, requiring only forward passes through models such as OPT-125m that may be run on consumer
hardware; it provides intuitive visualizations that make complex distributional patterns immediately
apparent; and it enables rigorous statistical testing. The method’s model-agnostic nature means it
can be applied across different architectures and scales, making it a versatile tool for research and
industry.
Our initial investigations point toward promising future research directions. For instance, DMAP
might be used for data curation and efficient fine-tuning (Ankner et al., 2025), or to advance cal-
ibration approaches for instruction-tuned models, rather than using temperature scaling to align
perplexity with pre-trained models. Alternatively, future work may calibrate DMAP distributions
to match human text patterns, potentially offering more nuanced control over model confidence
during frontier model training. The distinct DMAP signatures we observed across different text
domains (poetry, news, technical writing) suggest the method could formalize how language model
performance varies across contexts, separating inherent prediction difficulty from model-specific
limitations. Perhaps most intriguingly, the dramatic differences in DMAP plots when generator and
evaluator models differ point toward entirely new approaches to language model identification and
forensic analysis. We are most excited for the applications we have yet to anticipate and believe
that we have only scratched the surface of what we can learn through close examination of next-
token probability distributions. DMAP provides a clear, principled window into that rich statistical
landscape.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
7
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
All datasets used are public or generated as detailed in our experimental setup in Section 5 and
Appendices J and K. Code implementing DMAP is available on GitHub.1
8
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
K.W. was financially supported by the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) through
the STFC DiS-CDT at the University of Cambridge. Y.L. was supported by the STFC DiS-CDT
scheme and the Kavli Institute for Cosmology, Cambridge. We would also like to thank our review-
ers for helpful feedback and comments.
REFERENCES
Albert Q. Jiang and others. Mistral 7B, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
Zachary Ankner, Cody Blakeney, Kartik Sreenivasan, Max Marion, Matthew L Leavitt, and Man-
sheej Paul.
Perplexed by Perplexity: Perplexity-Based Data Pruning With Small Reference
Models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=1GTARJhxtq.
Guangsheng Bao, Yanbin Zhao, Zhiyang Teng, Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. Fast-DetectGPT: Effi-
cient Zero-Shot Detection of Machine-Generated Text via Conditional Probability Curvature. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large Scale Au-
toregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow, March 2021. URL https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.5297715.
Prateek Chhikara. Mind the confidence gap: Overconfidence, calibration, and distractor effects in
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11028, 2025.
F. N. David and N. L. Johnson. The probability integral transformation when parameters are esti-
mated from the sample. Biometrika, 35(1/2):182–190, 1948.
Matthieu Dubois, Franc¸ois Yvon, and Pablo Piantanida. MOSAIC: Multiple Observers Spotting AI
Content. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 24230–
24247, 2025.
Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. AlpacaFarm: A Simulation Framework for
Methods that Learn from Human Feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4hturzLcKX.
Liam Dugan, Alyssa Hwang, Filip Trhl´ık, Andrew Zhu, Josh Magnus Ludan, Hainiu Xu, Daphne Ip-
polito, and Chris Callison-Burch. RAID: A Shared Benchmark for Robust Evaluation of Machine-
Generated Text Detectors. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12463–12492, 2024.
Ebtesam Almazrouei and others. The Falcon Series of Open Language Models, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2311.16867.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical Neural Story Generation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Lizhe Fang, Yifei Wang, Zhaoyang Liu, Chenheng Zhang, Stefanie Jegelka, Jinyang Gao, Bolin
Ding, and Yisen Wang. What is Wrong with Perplexity for Long-context Language Modeling?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23771, 2024.
Ronald Aylmer Fisher. Statistical methods for research workers. Number 5 in Biological Mono-
graphs and Manuals. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, 1928.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M Rush. GLTR: Statistical Detection and
Visualization of Generated Text. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 111–116, 2019.
Tilmann Gneiting, Fadoua Balabdaoui, and Adrian E. Raftery. Probabilistic forecasts, calibration
and sharpness. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 69(2):
243–268, 2007.
Steven Goodman. A dirty dozen: twelve p-value misconceptions. In Seminars in hematology,
volume 45, pp. 135–140. Elsevier, 2008.
Aaron Grattafiori et al. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2407.21783.
Abhimanyu Hans, Avi Schwarzschild, Valeriia Cherepanova, Hamid Kazemi, Aniruddha Saha,
Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Spotting LLMs With Binoculars: Zero-
Shot Detection of Machine-Generated Text. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
on Machine Learning, pp. 17519–17537, 2024.
Daphne Ippolito, Daniel Duckworth, and Douglas Eck. Automatic Detection of Generated Text is
Easiest when Humans are Fooled. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1808–1822, 2020.
Tom Kempton and Stuart Burrell. Local Normalization Distortion and the Thermodynamic Formal-
ism of Decoding Strategies for Large Language Models. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy
Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pp. 22216–22231, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Association for
Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-335-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp.
1210. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.1210/.
Tom Kempton, Stuart Burrell, and Connor J Cheverall. TempTest: Local Normalization Distortion
and the Detection of Machine-generated Text. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Statistics, pp. 1972–1980. PMLR, 2025.
Andreas K¨opf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von R¨utte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi-Rui Tam, Keith Stevens,
Abdullah Barhoum, Nguyen Minh Duc, Oliver Stanley, Rich´ard Nagyfi, Shahul ES, Sameer Suri,
David Glushkov, Arnav Dantuluri, Andrew Maguire, Christoph Schuhmann, Huu Nguyen, and
Alexander Mattick. OpenAssistant conversations - democratizing large language model align-
ment. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc.
Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphrasing
evades detectors of AI-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Beier Luo, Shuoyuan Wang, Yixuan Li, and Hongxin Wei. Your Pre-trained LLM is Secretly an
Unsupervised Confidence Calibrator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16690, 2025.
Clara Meister and Ryan Cotterell. Language Model Evaluation Beyond Perplexity. In Chengqing
Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5328–5339, Online, August 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.414. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.414/.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Niloofar Mireshghallah, Justus Mattern, Sicun Gao, Reza Shokri, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick.
Smaller Language Models are Better Zero-shot Machine-Generated Text Detectors. In Proceed-
ings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 278–293, 2024.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. De-
tectGPT: Zero-Shot Machine-Generated Text Detection using Probability Curvature. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 24950–24962. PMLR, 2023.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t Give Me the Details, Just the Summary!
Topic-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme Summarization. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. Transformer-Based Language Model Surprisal Predicts Hu-
man Reading Times Best with About Two Billion Training Tokens. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 1915–1921, 2023.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ Ques-
tions for Machine Comprehension of Text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383–2392, 2016.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi.
Can AI-Generated Text be Reliably Detected?, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2303.11156.
Maohao Shen, Subhro Das, Kristjan Greenewald, Prasanna Sattigeri, Gregory Wornell, and Soumya
Ghosh. Thermometer: Towards Universal Calibration for Large Language Models. In Proceed-
ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 44687–44711, 2024.
Jinyan Su, Terry Zhuo, Di Wang, and Preslav Nakov. DetectLLM: Leveraging Log Rank Infor-
mation for Zero-Shot Detection of Machine-Generated Text. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 12395–12412, 2023.
Yutao Sun, Zhenyu Li, Yike Zhang, Tengyu Pan, Bowen Dong, Yuyi Guo, and Jianyong Wang.
Efficient Attention Mechanisms for Large Language Models: A Survey, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.19595.
George R Terrell and David W Scott. Oversmoothed nonparametric density estimates. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 80(389):209–214, 1985.
Sean Trott and Pamela Rivi`ere. Measuring and Modifying the Readability of English Texts with
GPT-4. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Text Simplification, Accessibility and Readability
(TSAR 2024), pp. 126–134, 2024.
Vivek Verma, Eve Fleisig, Nicholas Tomlin, and Dan Klein. Ghostbuster: Detecting Text Ghostwrit-
ten by Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1702–1717, 2024.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, et al. Qwen3 Technical Report, 2025. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
Chenghao Yang and Ari Holtzman. How Alignment Shrinks the Generative Horizon. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.17871, 2025.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformer
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Chiwei Zhu, Benfeng Xu, Quan Wang, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong Mao. On the Calibration
of Large Language Models and Alignment. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2023.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3.1
Suppose that a text w1 · · · wT has been generated by pure sampling from language model p. At time
i, token v is selected with probability p(v|w1 · · · wi−1). Token v defines an interval [a, b] of length
p(v|w1 · · · wi−1) (see the definition of DMAP, Section 3.1). The points a, b are functions of both v
and the context w1 · · · wi−1, to keep notation clean we suppress this dependence here.
Then, following the DMAP algorithm, a point xi is selected according to the uniform distribution
on [a, b]. Let P denote the partition of [0, 1) into intervals [a, b) corresponding to different tokens v
given fixed context w1 · · · wi−1.
In order to prove that the process of picking v according to p(·|w1 · · · wi−1) and then picking xi
according to U([a, b]) produces points distributed according to U([0, 1]), it is enough to show that
for any interval (c, d), P(xi ∈(c, d)) = d −c. It is enough to prove this for intervals (c, d) which
are fully contained in one of the intervals in the partition P, the result for larger (c, d) follows by
standard rules of probability.
Now, given context w1 · · · wi−1, let (c, d) be a subset of some interval (a, b) in P, where (a, b) is
the interval corresponding to selection of some token v. Then
P(xi ∈(c, d))
=
P(xi ∈(a, b)).P(xi ∈(c, d))
P(xi ∈(a, b))
=
p(v|w1 · · · wi−1).(d −c)
(b −a)
=
(b −a)(d −c)
(b −a) = d −c
as required. Here we used that xi ∈(a, b) exactly when the token v defining interval (a, b) was
selected, which happens with probability p(v|w1 · · · wi−1) = b −a.
We have shown here that, for any choice of context w1 · · · wi−1, xi will be distributed according to
U(0, 1). Thus we have shown that xi is independent of w1 · · · wi−1, and so the resulting sequence
x1 · · · xT is i.i.d.
Finally we note that no properties of the language model were assumed in the above proof. In
particular, one could define p(·|w1 · · · wi−1) to be the next token probability distribution resulting
from sampling from Llama 3.1 at temperature 0.7. In that case, our result about xi being i.i.d.
according to the uniform distribution on [0, 1] continues to hold, provided the same language model
decoding strategy pair is used in the generation of text and generation of DMAP plots.
Proposition 3.1 does not hold directly for entropy weighted DMAP, since entropy weighted DMAP
does not produce points xi. One can make corresponding statements about the expected integral
of
χIi
|Ii| over any interval A and see that entropy weighted DMAP plots for texts generated by the
evaluator model do converge to the uniform distribution, but rates of convergence do not follow so
easily.
B
ON THE SHAPE OF DMAP PLOTS FOR TEMPERATURE, TOP-P, AND TOP-k
SAMPLING
Recall that, for a language model p and context w1 · · · wi−1, and for given values of τ, π and k,
temperature sampling picks token pi with probability
qτ(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) =
p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)
1
τ
P
v∈V p(v|w1 · · · wi−1)
1
τ .
Top-k sampling defines the top-k set Vk to be the k tokens with highest model (conditional) proba-
bility p(·|w1 · · · wi−1) and assigns probability
qk(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) =
p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)
P
v∈Vk p(v|w1 · · · wi−1)
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
to tokens wi in the top-k set, and zero mass outside of the top-k set.
Finally top-p (nucleus) sampling orders the tokens in V by decreasing conditional probability
p(·|w1 · · · wi−1) and defines the top-p set Vπ to be the first m tokens, where m is the smallest integer
for which Pm
i=1 p(vi|w1 · · · wi−1) ≥π. Top-p sampling then chooses token wi with probability
qπ(wi|w1 · · · wi−1) =
p(wi|w1 · · · wi−1)
P
v∈Vπ p(v|w1 · · · wi−1).
We then ask, given a long text sampled by top-k sampling, what are the limiting statistics of the size
of the top-k set. The expected shape of the DMAP plot for top-k sampling is the function
P(The total mass of the top-k set is greater than x)
renormalized to have integral one. This is a decreasing function, typically nearly flat on [0, 0.5],
before smoothly decreasing towards 0.
Similarly, for top-p sampling, the expected shape is the function
P(The total mass of the top-π set is greater than x),
again renormalized to have mass one. This is flat on [0, π], before decaying very rapidly. There is a
sharp cut off reflecting the majority of cases where the size of the top-π set is only just larger than
π, and a non-vanishing tail reflecting the fact that the proportion of times for which the top-π set has
mass close to 1 is non-zero.
For the shape of the DMAP plots in the case of temperature sampling, we mention only that it is a
smooth deformation. There is an interval close to 0 upon which the DMAP is nearly flat, but this is
much smaller than in the top-k case as it is a function of the mass of the most likely token, rather
than of the top-k most likely tokens.
C
WHY ARE BLACK-BOX BASE MODELS TAIL BIASED?
The fact that our plots of texts generated by one base language model and evaluated by another base
language model (Figures 2 and 23) are tail-biased is partially supported by theory. In Kempton &
Burrell (2025), it was shown that for a language model P and a generation length T, pure sampling
from P is the unique way of maximizing the sum of entropy and per-token log-likelihood (as judged
by P). That is, whenever we sample from a language model Q for which the entropy is at least as
large as the entropy of P, the resulting plot text must have lower expected per-token log-likelihood
(as measured by P). This is a statement about log-likelihood, not a statement about position in the
probability distribution, and so doesn’t directly correspond to saying the DMAP plots should be
tail-biased, but it gives a strong indication in that direction.
D
RATES OF CONVERGENCE IN PROPOSITION 3.1
Proposition 3.1 implies that DMAP plots of texts generated by pure sampling from a language
model, evaluated by the same language model, should look roughly flat. One might wonder whether
we can make this statement more precise with a rate of convergence. The answer is positive, as
detailed in the following proposition.
Proposition D.1. Given a language model P, a text w1 · · · wT generated by P and a number of bins
k, let x1, · · · xT be the set of points generated by DMAP with P as the evaluator model. Further
define frequencies
fi = #{j ∈{1, · · · T} : i−1
k
≤xj < i
k}
T
and the χ2 statistic
χ2 = Tk
k
X
i=1

fi −1
k
2
as in Section 5.1. Then χ2 is asymptotically distributed according to the χ2
k−1 (the χ2 distribution
with k −1 degrees of freedom).
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
An immediate application of this is that we evaluate the plausibility of the statement ‘Text w1 · · · wT
was generated by pure sampling from language model P’. To do this, we compute the χ2 statistic c
arising from the text w1 · · · wT and use standard statistics packages to compute the probability that
points drawn according to the χ2
k−1 distribution would be larger than c. For large T, this is arbitrarily
close to the probability that text generated by language model P would generate as extreme a χ2
statistic.
We mention one note of caution about the word ‘asymptotically’ in Proposition D.1. For finite T,
the χ2 statistic is not perfectly distributed according to the χ2 distribution (indeed it is supported
on a finite set), and so our computations of p-values are not exact. A conservative rule of thumb is
that T should be at least 10k for reliable p-values, so one should evaluate at least 400 tokens when
plotting histograms with 40 bins.
Proposition D.1 is a standard result in statistics, proved by a slightly delicate application of the
central limit theorem.
One should be cautious in interpreting p-values, as they are famously prone to misinterpretation.
Many articles can be found explaining these misconceptions, see for example Goodman (2008).
E
EFFICIENCY AND EMPIRICAL CONVERGENCE RATES
This section provides a discussion on algorithmic efficiency and empirical results on the convergence
of DMAP as the number of tokens, and therefore DMAP samples, grows. This latter evidence is to
supplement the theoretical analysis of convergence in Proposition D.1. Figure 5 shows DMAP plots
for 200, 2000, and 20, 000 tokens. We see that for extremely small token sizes there is significant
noise, while this quickly stabilizes. By 2000 tokens, we see identifiable patterns emerging, and by
20, 000 the noise is fairly negligible with strong characteristic patterns present. If you are working
with extremely small amounts of data with DMAP, you may reduce the impact of the noise by
reducing the number of bins in your histogram. Even at 200 tokens this approach allows us to
recover information about decoding strategies, see Figure 6.
The runtime efficiency and speed of DMAP is dominated by the underlying language model. For
vanilla transformers, we therefore have quadratic time and memory complexity, though this could be
improved if considering language models based on more efficient alternative attention mechanisms
(Sun et al., 2025).
F
ENTROPY WEIGHTING
In Section 3.2 we introduced entropy weighting as a way of suppressing the effect of tokens selected
at times where uncertainty around the next token is very low and a single option has extremely high
likelihood (say probability 0.995). In such situations, the points plotted by DMAP tend to have
distribution close to the uniform distribution irrespective of the method of text generation.
To illustrate this point, we consider DMAP plots of texts generated by Mistral-7B-v0.3 and evaluated
by Llama-3.1-8B. The full entropy-weighted DMAP plot is present as the first plot on the second
row of Figure 8. In Figure 7 we separate out points by the entropy of the next token probability
distribution, plotting the low entropy case in (a), the medium entropy case in (b), and the high
entropy case in (c). As predicted, in the low entropy case the DMAP plot is extremely flat, since
very little information is uncovered from these points. This illustrates our reasons for giving lower
weight to points of entropy below 2. In this example, tokens where the entropy is below 0.5 make
up 7474 of the 77321 tokens evaluated. In contrast, (b) and (c) contain noticeable peaks.
G
PROMPT SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
This section includes experiments investigating the sensitivity of DMAP to the inclusion or exclusion
of the prompt. In addition, we test the sensitivity of DMAP to the first few tokens for which there is
no or small amounts of context to shape the conditional distributions.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 5: Empirical convergence analysis of DMAP with 40-bin histograms. This figure illustrates
the convergence of 40-bin DMAP histograms as the number of tokens, and thus DMAP samples,
increases from 200 to 20, 000. At extremely low sample sizes we see high variability and noise,
while the strong characteristic shapes we expect emerge as the number of tokens increases. We
recommend choosing the number of bins as a function of the number of tokens being evaluated, for
example using the Terrell-Scott rule, so as to mitigate this noise.
First, we repeated a large scale white box and black box experiment, to compare the efficacy of
DMAP with and without access to the prompt. The results are shown in Figure 8 (without access
to the prompt) and Figure 9 (with access to the prompt). These plots show that in realistic settings
where one may wish to apply DMAP, the utility is equal with or without access to the prompt.
However, note that without access to the prompt, despite the characteristic shapes being strongly
present, there is a slight increase in the noisiness or irregularity in the plot. This is expected, since
the reduced context will cause increased variance in the conditional distributions, particularly for
tokens near the start of the text.
To explore sensitivity to the initial tokens further, for both settings including and excluding the
prompt, we conducted an additional 32 experiments. Here, we also consider an initial cutoff. For
an initial cutoff of N, we use the first N tokens to compute conditional probabilities for tokens
N + 1, . . . but do not plot the corresponding N DMAP samples. This is intended to remove noise
associated with the early tokens with insufficient context. We consider four core configurations i)
include prompt and initial cutoff = 30, ii) include prompt and initial cutoff = 0, iii) exclude prompt
and initial cutoff = 30, and iv) exclude prompt and initial cutoff = 0. Figure 10 analyses these four
configurations for texts of length 300 tokens, while Figure 11 considers texts of length 50 tokens.
These results show that at realistic token counts both the prompt and initial cutoff have only a minor
effect. However, at very small token counts, DMAP is affected by the prompt. This is to be expected
as before, since the prompt is a significant proportion of the total tokens in this case and therefore the
statistical effect is larger. This gives a further reason to caution against using DMAP on extremely
small samples of data.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 6: Empirical convergence analysis of DMAP with 5-bin histograms. This figure shows that
noise due to extremely small sample sizes may be mitigated by using fewer bins. In this regime,
we still see approximate versions of the characteristic patterns present in the top row of Figure 2, in
contrast to the noisy estimates found in the first row of Figure 5.
Figure 7: DMAP plots of text generated by Mistral and evaluated by Llama. Plot (a) shows only
those tokens for which the entropy of the next token probability distribution is below 0.5, (b) shows
entropy in the range (0.5,1), and (c) shows points where the entropy is greater than 2. We see that the
plot (a) of low entropy tokens looks flat even though we are in the tail-biased case of pure sampling
from a base model with different models used for generation and detection.
H
RELATIONSHIP TO PROBABILITY INTEGRAL TRANSFORM
One way to view DMAP is that it builds on the classical probability integral transform (PIT), see
Fisher (1928); David & Johnson (1948); Gneiting et al. (2007), as discussed in the related work
section. However, a key difference between DMAP and PIT is that DMAP dynamically orders
tokens by sorting the logits prior to generating a sample on the unit interval. As such, it also encodes
rank information as studied in works such as Su et al. (2023). For completeness, in Figure 12 we
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 8: White and black box experiments excluding the prompt with texts of length 300. For
these plots, the prompt was excluded. White and black box evaluation. Plots are labeled: (Generator
Model, Evaluator Model). Plots on the main diagonal (green) correspond to the white box setting,
while off-diagonal plots (pink) correspond to the black box setting. Observe that in the black box
setting we see plots with heavy tails.
perform this extension of PIT to categorical variables where our dynamic token ordering is replaced
with a random token ordering. We have been unable to extract useful information from these plots.
I
ANALYSIS OF ADVERSARIAL PARAPHRASING
DMAP is a general tool for the statistical analysis of text, and not itself a specialized detector of
machine-generated text. That said, we have seen throughout this paper that it can highlight important
differences between machine and human generated text, for example, see Figure 2.
Paraphrasing is a well-known and important technique that has been shown to be an effective ad-
versarial attack against common machine-generated text detectors (Sadasivan et al., 2025). In this
appendix, we ask what the impact is of paraphrasing on DMAP visualizations. In particular, do
paraphrasing attacks make DMAP visualizations of synthetic data look more like that of human
data, analogous to their impact on common machine-generated text detectors? To answer this, we
performed experiments using DIPPER (Krishna et al., 2024), a popular model used to evaluate ro-
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 9: White and black box experiments including the prompt with texts of length 300. For these
plots, the prompt was used in computation of next token probabilities of later tokens, but DMAP
samples were not generated for tokens in the prompt. White and black box evaluation. Plots are
labeled: (Generator Model, Evaluator Model). Plots on the main diagonal (green) correspond to the
white box setting, while off-diagonal plots (pink) correspond to the black box setting. Observe that
in the black box setting we see plots with heavy tails.
bustness to adversarial paraphrasing attacks, for example, see Sadasivan et al. (2025); Kempton
et al. (2025). Our experiments show that DMAP visualizations are robust to paraphrasing attacks
with DIPPER (Krishna et al., 2024). In particular, we see that paraphrased machine-generated text
and human text are clearly distinct, see Figures 13, 14 and 15.
In addition, these figures also show that DMAP identifies subtle shifts between synthetic data and
paraphrased synthetic data, shedding some new light on how paraphrasing attacks alter the distri-
bution of text. Collectively, these results are strong evidence that an effective text detector may be
built on top of DMAP that is far more robust to paraphrasing attacks than existing approaches. In
addition, these results prompt the use of DMAP to explore the whole array of paraphrasing attacks
in the literature to obtain a deeper understanding of their underlying statistical mechanisms.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 10: Prompt sensitivity analysis with texts of length 300 tokens. Each column corresponds to
a generation strategy. From left to right columns, we have pure, top-p = 0.8, temperature τ = 0.8,
and top-k = 50 sampling. (a)-(d) include the prompt and set initial cutoff = 30. (e)-(h) include
the prompt and set initial cutoff = 0. (i)-(l) exclude the prompt and set initial cutoff = 30. (m)-(p)
include the prompt and set initial cutoff = 0. The second and fourth rows show setting initial cutoff
= 0 increased variability. Comparing the first and third rows shows excluding the prompt causes
a slight increase in noise. In contrast to Figure 11, overall we see stable characteristic curves and
low sensitivity to both the prompt inclusion and initial cutoff in this setting where the sample size
is realistic. This is to be expected, since the prompt is a small proportion of the total tokens in this
case.
J
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR SECTION 5.2
We follow a setup similar to, for example, Mitchell et al. (2023) or Kempton et al. (2025). In par-
ticular, given a large language model and sample of human text from XSum (Narayan et al., 2018),
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), or WritingPrompts (Writing) (Fan et al., 2018), we construct 150
tokens of synthetic text using the first 30 tokens as context. We then perform zero-shot classification
on the balanced dataset of real and synthetic data. For Fast-DetectGPT (Bao et al., 2023) and De-
tectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023) we use GPT-Neo 2.7b (Black et al., 2021), which Fast-DetectGPT
report as being empirically superior for black box detection with their method. For Binoculars we
use the recommended combination of Falcon 7b for the observer model and Falcon 7b Instruct for
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 11: Prompt sensitivity analysis with texts of length 50 tokens. Each column corresponds to
a generation strategy. From left to right columns, we have pure, top-p = 0.8, temperature τ = 0.8,
and top-k = 50 sampling. (a)-(d) include the prompt and set initial cutoff = 30. (e)-(h) include the
prompt and set initial cutoff = 0. (i)-(l) exclude the prompt and set initial cutoff = 30. (m)-(p) include
the prompt and set initial cutoff = 0. All four rows show setting significantly increased variability
and noise compared to the setting with 300 tokens per text (Figure 10). Compared to Figure 10, we
increased sensitivity to both the prompt inclusion and initial cutoff in this setting where the sample
sizes are very small. This is to be expected, since the prompt is a significant proportion of the total
tokens in this case.
the performer model (Ebtesam Almazrouei and others, 2023). The generation models we use are
Llama-3.1 8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Mistral-7B-v0.3 (Albert Q. Jiang and others, 2023), and
Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025). For each method, we report AUROC as the evalulation score as in
(Mitchell et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2023; Kempton et al., 2025).
K
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR SECTION 5.3
We conduct our experiments on two sizes of Pythia models (410m, 1B) fine-tuned with one of three
instruction fine-tuning datasets: one including only human-written text and two with responses that
have been partially regenerated with an external language model.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 12: Comparison of DMAP with Probability Integral Transform. Each column corresponds to
a generation strategy. From left to right columns, we have pure (top-p=1), top-p = 0.8, temperature
τ = 0.8, and top-k = 50 sampling. The top row (a)-(d) shows PIT with uniformly random token
order. The bottom row (e)-(h) shows standard DMAP for comparison. In this scenario, we see plots
for PIT with uniformly random token order do not effectively differentiate decoding strategies.
Figure 13: DMAP Analysis of Paraphrasing Attacks. These plots show DMAP visualizations for
text generated by real, synthetic, and paraphrased synthetic data. The dataset used was SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016). Synthetic data was generated using Llama-3.1-8B completions. Para-
phrased data was created using the model DIPPER developed for adversarial paraphrasing attacks on
machine-generated text detectors (Krishna et al., 2024). These plots show that paraphrased machine-
generated text and human text are clearly distinct in DMAP visualizations. In addition, DMAP sheds
light on subtle changes in the distribution between standard synthetic and paraphrased text, where
we see a slight flattening of the distribution.
Fine-Tuning.
The instruction fine-tuning datasets are the following: (1) OASST2 (K¨opf et al.
(2023)), a human-written instruction tuning dataset, (2) OASST2 with responses regenerated with a
Llama 3.1 8B model with generation temperature 0.7, and (3) The same as (2) but with generation
temperature 1.0. OASST2 is a tree-structured multi-turn dataset with various conversation paths, but
for our fine-tuning purposes we extract only the first prompt-response pair, as we only evaluate the
response to a single query. Although this means we are using a portion of the text in the dataset, we
continue to refer to it as OASST2 throughout this work. The data is split into a train and validation
set following the original splitting of OASST2 on the Huggingface-hosted dataset 2. Because the
2https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst2
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 14: DMAP Analysis of Paraphrasing Attacks. These plots show DMAP visualizations for text
generated by real, synthetic, and paraphrased synthetic data. The dataset used was Reddit Writing
(Fan et al., 2018). Synthetic data was generated using Llama-3.1-8B completions. Paraphrased data
was created using the model DIPPER developed for adversarial paraphrasing attacks on machine-
generated text detectors (Krishna et al., 2024). These plots show that paraphrased machine-generated
text and human text are clearly distinct in DMAP visualizations. In addition, DMAP sheds light on
subtle changes in the distribution between standard synthetic and paraphrased text, where we see a
slight flattening of the distribution.
Figure 15: DMAP Analysis of Paraphrasing Attacks. These plots show DMAP visualizations for text
generated by real, synthetic, and paraphrased synthetic data. The dataset used was XSum (Narayan
et al., 2018). Synthetic data was generated using Llama-3.1-8B completions. Paraphrased data
was created using the model DIPPER developed for adversarial paraphrasing attacks on machine-
generated text detectors (Krishna et al., 2024). These plots show that paraphrased machine-generated
text and human text are clearly distinct in DMAP visualizations. In addition, DMAP sheds light on
subtle changes in the distribution between standard synthetic and paraphrased text, where we see a
slight flattening of the distribution.
responses in fine-tuning datasets (2) and (3) are generated using a non-instruction-tuned base model,
we keep the first 20 tokens of the human response text as part of the response generation prompt.
For the creation of the DMAP plots, we only consider the tokens beyond this point.
For the fine-tuning step, the prompt-response pairs are formatted to be separated with a line break
without any additional role tags or special tokens, so as to ensure a naturalistic output and to allow
for exact comparison between fine-tuned and non-fine-tuned models.
Evaluation.
We use OPT-125 as the evaluator model throughout, creating DMAP plots for the val-
idation split of the respective datasets. In each case, the evaluated models are prompted in the same
way as with the creation of the the training data, with only the newly-generated tokens contributing
to the creation of the DMAP plot.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 16: DMAP plots created using OPT-125 for the three fine-tuning datasets: a) OASST2
human-written prompt-response pairs, b) OASST2 with responses regenerated by Llama 3.1 8B
at temperature 0.7. and c) OASST2 with responses regenerated by Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 1.0.
Figure 17: DMAP plots generated by pure sampling from Pythia 410m, models with (a) no fine-
tuning, (b) fine-tuned on OASST2 human data, (c) fine-tuned on OASST2 with responses regener-
ated by Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 0.7, (d) fine-tuned on OASST2 with responses regenerated by
Llama 3.1 8B at temperature 1.0.
K.1
RESULTS
We first visualize the DMAP distribution for each of our three fine-tuning datasets in Figure 16,
each of which exhibit a relatively typical shape for the respective data sources: human-generated,
synthetic pure-sampled and synthetic temperature-sampled at temperature 0.7.
We observe next the extent to which fine-tuning on these datasets affects the DMAP plots. We
present the results for a single model (Pythia 1B) in Figure 4, with the remaining experiment for
Pythia 410m found here in Figure 17 showing the same visual pattern.
L
OBSERVATIONS ON DETECTOR DESIGN
L.1
USING DIFFERENT DETECTOR AND GENERATOR MODELS CAN BE USEFUL
Methods based on probability curvature seem to work best when the generating and detecting models
are the same (although Hans et al. (2024) and Dubois et al. (2025) use more than one model in
detection). Comparing the distributions of human-written text (Figure 18), pure-sampled text where
generator and detector models are the same (Figure 2) and pure-sampled text with different generator
and detector models (Figure 23), one sees that human-written text looks most different from machine
text when a different detector model is used. Perhaps an alternative conclusion to be drawn from
Table 1 is that a variant Fast-DetectGPT can remain an effective detector of pure-sampled text, but
DMAP should be first used to calibrate whether machine generated text is head-biased or tail-biased.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
L.2
HUMAN-WRITTEN TEXT HAS A MORE SUBTLE DISTRIBUTION THAN CURRENTLY
EXPLOITED
Detectors based on probability curvature exploit the fact that human-written text is tail-biased. In
Figure 18 we see that, while this is true, it is also true that they contain tokens from the very tail of
the language model probability distribution less often (tail-collapse). This is particularly important
as the tail of the probability distribution is where log-likelihood values are at their most extreme.
Detectors using log-likelihood or log-rank to distinguish between human and machine generated text
would presumably be more effective if they discounted this bottom five percent of the probability
distribution where human-written text is under-represented.
L.3
INSTRUCTION TUNED MODELS ARE EASIER TO DETECT THAN BASE MODELS
It was noted that in Ippolito et al. (2020) that it is easiest for a machine to detect machine-generated
text when decoding strategies such as top-p, top-k and temperature have been used. Figures 2 and
18 would support this conclusion, the distributional differences between human and machine text
are clearly much greater when top-p, top-k or temperature sampling have been used.
M
FURTHER QUESTIONS
1. In Shen et al. (2024) the authors attempt to curb the overconfidence of instruction fine-tuned
language models by using temperature scaling with temperature larger than 1 in order to
bring the perplexity in line with pre-trained language models. Does DMAP give any insight
to this process? What would happen if, instead of trying to bring perplexity in line with the
pre-trained language model, one tried to bring the DMAP plots in line with human text?
DMAP plots are a much better tool for checking calibration with a pre-trained language
model than the currently used likelihood of the top token.
2. In Figure 18 we show DMAP plots for different examples of human-written text. These
plots are not perfectly flat, and are slightly different in different settings (e.g. poetry vs
news). Do these plots effectively describe the underperformance of the evaluator model in
different settings in a way that separates the underperformance of the language model at
next token prediction from the inherent difficulty of next-token prediction (which varies by
setting)? Can one formalise this and extract useful metrics?
3. Figure 9 shows texts generated by Llama, Mistral and Falcon, evaluated by Llama, Mistral
and Falcon. In each case, the shape of the DMAP plot is very different depending on
whether the evaluator and generator models are the same. Can these ideas form the basis
for a new approach to language model identification?
N
FURTHER PLOTS
N.1
SYNTHETIC TEXT
In this section we include illustrative plots with larger evaluation models. We see similar phenomena
as in Figure 2.
N.2
HUMAN-WRITTEN TEXT
We plot human-written text in Figure 22, evaluated by OPT-125m. We use the RAID dataset across
four different categories: scientific abstracts, books, news and poetry.
We see differences in these plots, corresponding to the differing competence of OPT-125m in these
areas.
N.3
BLACK BOX BASE LANGUAGE MODELS
In Figure 8 we plotted pure generated text from base language models Llama 3.1 8B, Mistral 7B and
Qwen3 8B, evaluated by each other. In Figure 23 we see the same texts evaluated by OPT-125m.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 18: Illustrative DMAP histograms. Plots of XSum data (Narayan et al., 2018) generated by
OPT-6.7b, evaluated by OPT-6.7b. The generation strategies (left to right) are (a) pure sampling, (b)
top-p = 0.8 sampling, (c) temperature τ = 0.8 sampling, and (d) top-k = 50.
Figure 19: Illustrative DMAP histograms. Plots of XSum data (Narayan et al., 2018) generated by
OPT-2.7b, evaluated by OPT-2.7b. The generation strategies (left to right) are (a) pure sampling, (b)
top-p = 0.8 sampling, (c) temperature τ = 0.8 sampling, and (d) top-k = 50.
Figure 20: Illustrative DMAP histograms. Plots of XSum data (Narayan et al., 2018) generated by
OPT-1.3b, evaluated by OPT-1.3b. The generation strategies (left to right) are (a) pure sampling, (b)
top-p = 0.8 sampling, (c) temperature τ = 0.8 sampling, and (d) top-k = 50.
The images here further support the claim in the main text that pure-sampled text looks flat when the
generator and evaluator models are the same, and looks heavy tailed (tail bias) when another base
model is used for evaluation.
O
LLM USAGE
LLMs were used to polish written text in the preparation of this manuscript.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 21: Illustrative DMAP histograms. Plots of XSum data (Narayan et al., 2018) generated by
OPT-350m, evaluated by OPT-350m. The generation strategies (left to right) are (a) pure sampling,
(b) top-p = 0.8 sampling, (c) temperature τ = 0.8 sampling, and (d) top-k = 50.
Figure 22: Human-written text in four categories: abstracts (a), books (b), news (c), and poetry (d).
Figure 23: Llama 3.1 8B, Mistral 7B, Falcon 7b and Qwen3 8B generated XSum data, evaluated by
OPT-125m.
28