--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
EXO-PLORE:
EXPLORING EXOSKELETON CONTROL
SPACE THROUGH HUMAN-ALIGNED SIMULATION
Geonho Leem1, Jaedong Lee2, Jehee Lee1, Seungmoon Song3, Jungdam Won1†
1Seoul National University, 2Holiday Robotics, 3Northeastern University
ABSTRACT
Exoskeletons show great promise for enhancing mobility, but providing appro-
priate assistance remains challenging due to the complexity of human adaptation
to external forces. Current state-of-the-art approaches for optimizing exoskeleton
controllers require extensive human experiments in which participants must walk
for hours, creating a paradox: those who could benefit most from exoskeleton
assistance, such as individuals with mobility impairments, are rarely able to par-
ticipate in such demanding procedures. We present Exo-plore, a simulation frame-
work that combines neuromechanical simulation with deep reinforcement learning
to optimize hip exoskeleton assistance without requiring real human experiments.
Exo-plore can (1) generate realistic gait data that captures human adaptation to
assistive forces, (2) produce reliable optimization results despite the stochastic
nature of human gait, and (3) generalize to pathological gaits, showing strong
linear relationships between pathology severity and optimal assistance1.
1
INTRODUCTION
Human mobility is fundamental to meeting basic life needs. While exoskeleton research shows
promise for enhancing mobility (Molinaro et al., 2024; Slade et al., 2022), providing appropriate
assistance, especially for users with atypical gait patterns, remains a challenge (Kim et al., 2024;
Kang et al., 2025). Users alter their movement patterns and redistribute muscle coordination in re-
sponse to assistance (Song & Collins, 2021), which can erode the benefits predicted by fixed-gait
assumptions (Dembia et al., 2017). To personalize assistance, researchers have employed human-
in-the-loop optimization (HILO) techniques, which constrain the exoskeleton controller design to a
small set of tunable parameters (e.g., peak torque timing, magnitude, and duration) and systemati-
cally explore this parameter space through human experiments (Zhang et al., 2017). While HILO
has proven effective for able-bodied young and older adults (Slade et al., 2022; Lakmazaheri et al.,
2024), it requires demanding experiments where participants must walk for hours while wearing
an exoskeleton. This situation presents a paradox: those who would benefit most from exoskele-
ton assistance, such as individuals with mobility impairments, are rarely able to participate in these
extensive optimization procedures.
Neuromechanical simulations (Song et al., 2021) that couple musculoskeletal dynamics with control
policies to predict how humans adapt to assistance have been proposed as a promising complement
to exhaustive HILO (Luo et al., 2024; Firouzi et al., 2025; Tan et al., 2025). Yet policy design re-
mains a bottleneck for reliable prediction. Biologically inspired controllers optimized with task cost
functions can generate human-like gait in certain scenarios, but application and validation for assis-
tive devices and pathological gaits remain limited (Song & Geyer, 2017; Geijtenbeek, 2019; Bersani
et al., 2023). Deep reinforcement learning (Deep RL) offers an alternative that is less constrained
by hand-specified control assumptions and potentially more generalizable, but most implementa-
tions that produce human-like motions rely on tracking reference motion-capture data to manage
large observation and action spaces (Lee et al., 2019; Song et al., 2021; Park et al., 2025). Pure
prediction is inherently challenging; practical approaches likely require both fitting controllers to
existing data and predicting responses in extended scenarios Park et al. (2022). However, there is no
unified framework to (i) fit controllers to observed human adaptations and (ii) predict responses in
unobserved assistive conditions, particularly for exoskeleton assistance in gait pathology.
†Corresponding author (jungdam@imo.snu.ac.kr)
1Code and videos available at https://daebangstn.github.io/exo-plore.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In this paper, we present Exo-plore, a neuromechanical-simulation framework that discovers hip ex-
oskeleton control parameters by coupling a Deep RL gait data generator with a stochasticity-aware
surrogate optimizer. The gait data generator is tuned to fit human experimental trends by match-
ing assistive moment/power scaling across assistance settings and walking speeds. This is achieved
through a reward designed to align with empirical adaptation patterns, which combines metabolic
energy minimization with a human–exoskeleton-interaction term based on resistance minimization
hypothesis. As a result, the generator adapts across hip-assistance levels and musculoskeletal im-
pairments, producing plausible assisted gaits in both healthy and pathological settings that align
with empirical trends. We then train a surrogate network on abundant simulation data from the gait
data generator to obtain smooth, differentiable CoT (cost of transport) landscapes to stabilize op-
timization under RL and simulation stochasticity. Using Exo-plore, we (i) reproduce assisted and
unassisted gait trends consistent with human experiments, including assistive moment/power scal-
ing and realistic metabolic reduction rates; (ii) identify speed-dependent optimal exoskeleton control
parameters for able-bodied gait (optimal torque delay decreases as speed increases); and (iii) gener-
alize to pathological gaits, revealing strong linear relations between pathology severity and optimal
assistance in four of five conditions.
2
RELATED WORK
Human-in-the-loop optimization (HILO) for exoskeletons.
Exoskeletons have demonstrated
the ability to provide various benefits, including improved walking speed and reduced metabolic
energy consumption (Molinaro et al., 2024; Slade et al., 2022; Lakmazaheri et al., 2024). However,
their effectiveness varies significantly depending on control parameter settings and users’ adapta-
tion to assistance (Poggensee & Collins, 2021). HILO methods have been widely used to address
both challenges by iteratively optimizing controllers based on real human responses and by evalu-
ating candidate parameters using metrics such as metabolic cost of transport (CoT) after an adapta-
tion (Zhang et al., 2017; Slade et al., 2024; Witte et al., 2020; Bryan et al., 2021; Song & Collins,
2021). In addition to CoT optimization, several studies have also optimized parameters based on
user preference or perceived comfort (Ingraham et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). However, because
experiments involved human participants, the number of iterations that can be performed to update
parameters is often limited to fewer than 30 iterations, even when using auxiliary techniques such
as online simulation (Gordon et al., 2022). Furthermore, individuals who might benefit most from
exoskeleton assistance (e.g., mobility-impaired individuals) often show limited tolerance to this op-
timization process (Welker et al., 2021; Lakmazaheri et al., 2024), making the application of HILO
often infeasible for these groups.
Neuromechanical simulation.
Neuromechanical simulations provide physics-based digital twins
for studying human movement, assistive devices, and neuromuscular impairments by coupling
multibody musculoskeletal models with Hill-type muscle actuators and a control policy that drives
muscle-driven dynamics (Song et al., 2021). Despite advances in modeling and simulation fidelity,
predictive capability hinges on the control model, which remains only partially understood and diffi-
cult to specify. Existing approaches either (i) treat control as a black box to reproduce target motions,
via trajectory optimization (De Groote & Falisse, 2021) or Deep RL (Song et al., 2021)—or (ii)
rely on hand-crafted, biologically inspired controllers tuned for habitual gait (Song & Geyer, 2015;
Bersani et al., 2023). These strategies can yield plausible motions but often face limits in general-
ization and computational efficiency, especially when predicting adaptations to novel exoskeleton
assistance or pathological conditions.
Deep RL-based Musculoskeletal Control.
Deep RL has shown promising results in neurome-
chanical simulation, but raises open questions about physiological fidelity and generalization (Lee
et al., 2019). Recent studies use Deep RL within neuromechanical simulations to explore potential
surgical effects, simulate gait impairments arising from altered muscle function, and synthesize di-
verse movements (Lee et al., 2019; Park et al., 2022; 2023; 2025). However, the sim-to-real gap
remains largely unvalidated for muscle activations, metabolic energy, and adaptability to external
assistance, which are critical for translational impact. While Luo et al. (2024) applied Deep RL to
exoskeleton control, their formulation depends on imitation policies, limiting adaptation to unseen
conditions. As a result, the simulation results do not align with natural human movement, and their
correlation with real experimental outcomes has not been validated. In contrast, Exo-plore fits to
established experimental trends and predicts responses in unseen conditions, enabling estimation of
biomechanical metrics essential for exoskeleton applications.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3
METHOD: THE EXO-PLORE FRAMEWORK
Figure 1 presents an overview of our Exo-plore framework, which operates on a musculoskeletal
character equipped with a hip exoskeleton (Lim et al., 2019a). The exoskeleton controller generates
hip assistive torque τexo(t) as follows:
τexo(t) = κ · u(t −∆t)
(1)
where u(t) = sin(θr) −sin(θl) is a control signal encoding relative motion of the two legs. θr, θl
denote the low-pass filtered right and left hip joint angles, respectively. The sine function bounds
the joint angle signal to the range [-1, 1]. κ and ∆t are control parameters, where the gain κ
scales the torque magnitude while the delay ∆t introduces temporal lag for the output (i.e., delayed-
feedback control). Since the assistive torque is proportional to the relative motion between the
two hip joints, κ effectively acts as a stiffness parameter. This formulation therefore resembles a
simplified impedance-control mechanism.
The objective of Exo-plore is to find the optimal control parameters (κ, ∆t) that minimize the sim-
ulated character’s metabolic cost-of-transport during walking. This is achieved through two com-
ponents: the gait data generator, which produces gait data that align with real human experiments,
and the exoskeleton optimizer, which efficiently explores the control parameter space to identify the
optimal parameters.
Figure 1: The Exo-plore framework. The generator produces gait trajectories under hip exoskele-
ton assistance using a musculoskeletal character with 164 muscles. Through our sim-to-real match-
ing approach, these trajectories replicate the adaptation patterns and metabolic responses observed
in real human experiments. The generated data are then used to train a surrogate network, which
enables efficient and customizable optimization of exoskeleton control parameters.
3.1
GAIT DATA GENERATOR
The human controller in the gait data generator consists of three modules: a pose network (PoseNet),
which computes positional-derivative (PD) target joint positions qd; a PD controller that generates
joint torques τPD to reduce the error between the target and current joint positions; then compensate
the exoskeleton assistance τexo from τPD to compute the torque to be generated by the muscles
τMCN; and a muscle coordination network (MCN), which maps the computed target joint torques
τMCN to muscle activations a. These activations are then applied to the underlying musculoskeletal
dynamics, and the states of the musculoskeletal character and the exoskeleton are updated accord-
ingly. The PoseNet and MCN are jointly trained during the iterative simulation process using Deep
RL and supervised learning, respectively, while a stable PD is used for our PD control (Tan et al.,
2011). The detailed architecture of the human controller is provided in Appendix A.
To train the PoseNet, we follow the formulation of Generative GaitNet (Park et al., 2022), but we
extend the state, action, and reward to incorporate the exoskeleton and improve motion naturalness.
Here, we describe only the crucial components, including our extensions, while other technical de-
tails are provided in Appendix B. The state is defined as s = (sskeleton, smuscle, sexo), where sskeleton
and smuscle represent the physical states of the musculoskeletal character, and sexo denotes the ex-
oskeleton state. The total reward is defined as
rtotal = wgait · rgait + warm · rarm + wenergy · renergy + wHEI · rHEI
(2)
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
where rgait encourages the character to follow the given target gait, and is defined as the product of
four components as rgait = rstep · rvel · rhead · rsway, where rstep encourages the specified step length,
rvel encourages the specified walking speed, and rhead and rsway stabilize the head and body sway,
respectively. To prevent unnatural arm movements, an imitation reward rarm is introduced. The
energy reward, renergy = 1−kenergy ·MEE, regularizes energy expenditure during walking, where
MEE denotes the metabolic energy expenditure, computed as follows:
d
dtMEE(a; α, β) =
X
i
mα
i aβ
i
(3)
where mi and ai are the mass and activation of the i-th muscle, respectively, and α, β are tunable
design parameters. This allows flexible adjustment between effort-like (α-dominant) and fatigue-
like (β-dominant) behaviors, in line with previous studies (Ackermann & Van den Bogert, 2010).
These are crucial parameters that must be properly adjusted to ensure that the simulation results align
with those from real human experiments. The detailed design of α and β is presented in Section 3.2.
To account for human adaptation during exoskeletal assistance, we introduce a novel reward rHEI
that explicitly models physical human-exoskeleton interaction (HEI). In our framework, rHEI plays a
critical role in bridging the sim-to-real gap under exoskeleton assistance. This reward is also further
discussed in Section 3.2.
The MCN is trained in a supervised manner to learn the mapping from desired joint torque τd to
muscle activations a. The total loss is computed as
LMCN =
τMCN −τ(a)
2 + wreg
a
2 + wIMR LIMR.
(4)
The first term guides the generated torque τ(a) from the output muscle activations a to match the
desired torque τMCN, while the second term penalizes excessively large activations. Please refer
to (Lee et al., 2019) for more technical details. Large muscles such as the gluteus medius and soleus
are represented by multiple line muscles. Controlling each line muscle independently could lead to
physiologically implausible results. To prevent this, we introduce the final term, the intra-muscular
regularizer (IMR), which enforces coherent activations among the line muscles belonging to the
same anatomical muscle group. Specifically, the IMR penalizes deviations from the mean group
activation, which is computed as follows:
LIMR =
Ng
X
g=1
X
j∈Gg
1
 |aj −¯ag| > 0.1
  aj −¯ag
2,
¯ag =
1
|Gg|
X
j∈Gg
aj.
(5)
where aj denotes the activation of the j-th muscle in muscle group g, and ¯ag is its corresponding
mean group activation. The number of muscle groups and the set of indices of the line muscles in
muscle group g are denoted by Ng and Gg, respectively. For details on LIMR, see Appendix C.
3.2
SIM-TO-REAL MATCHING IN GAIT DATA GENERATOR
The simulation results generated by the Gait data generator need to align with real human experimen-
tal results to ensure that the control parameters optimized in simulation are applicable to real-world
scenarios, a process often referred to as bridging the sim-to-real gap. To this end, we focus on repro-
ducing two core human behaviors observed in several biomechanics studies: the principle of energy
minimization and the active adaptation to exoskeleton assistance.
First, many studies have observed that human walking tends toward an energetically optimal
gait (Umberger & Martin, 2007; Zarrugh et al., 1974). This means that humans adjust their step
size and step frequency at each walking speed to minimize the metabolic cost-of-transport (CoT),
which is the metabolic energy expenditure per unit travel distance. As reported in previous stud-
ies (Maxwell Donelan et al., 2001), measured CoT values across different walking speeds form an
upward-opening parabola, and humans tend to select the minimum point as their preferred walking
speed (PWS) under nominal conditions. Based on this, we determine the MEE parameters (α, β) in
Equation 3 so that the resulting Walking speed - CoT curve and the corresponding PWS best match
those reported in real experiments. For this, we develop two algorithms (Algorithm 1 and 2). The
first algorithm assumes feasible values of (α, β) (Line 2), trains a gait data generator to compute
the PWS (Line 4), and selects the optimal values of (α, β) that best match real human PWS (Line
5-8). The second algorithm performs rollouts of gait trajectories across feasible parameters (Line
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2-3), calculates the CoT for each, and determines the PWS that yields the minimum CoT (Line 4-7).
We define two procedures used in algorithm 1 , 2 and 3.
trainGenerator.
This procedure trains a human controller conditioned on a given metabolic en-
ergy model Em:
G = trainGenerator(Em).
(6)
During this training process, the simulated musculoskeletal character does not wear an exoskeleton,
as we evaluate PWS in the absence of external assistance. Consequently, PoseNet does not use the
exoskeleton-related input rHEI.
rollout.
This procedure generates a gait trajectory from the trained gait data generator G for given
gait parameters (L, f):
τcyc = rollout(G(L, f)).
(7)
To ensure stable trajectory generation, we discard the first five gait cycles after the simulation starts
and use the subsequent ten cycles to construct the trajectory.
Based on those algorithms, the optimal parameters for our framework were determined as (α, β) =
(1.5, 1.0). A detailed technical discussion is provided in the Appendix D
Algorithm 1 Adjusting the MEE to make Exo-
plore to predict human PWS.
Notation: muscle i mass, activation mi, ai
Require: Human PWS vreal
Ensure: MEE parameter (α∗, β∗)
1: emin ←+∞, (α∗, β∗) ←∅
2: for (α, β) ∈candidate do
3:
Em ←MEE(α, β)
4:
Gi ←trainGenerator(Em)
5:
vsim ←evalPWS(Gi, Em)
6:
e ←|vreal −vsim|
7:
if e < emin then
8:
emin ←e, (α∗, β∗) ←(α, β)
9:
end if
10: end for
Algorithm 2 (evalPWS) evaluating PWS for gait
data generator
Notation: gait step length L, gait step frequency
f, gait cycle trajectory τcyc
Require: Data generator G, metabolic energy ex-
penditure Em
Ensure: vsim (PWS of G)
1: CoT ←+∞, vsim ←∅
2: for (L, f) ∈available do
3:
τcyc ←rollout(G(L, f))
4:
CoT = 1
L
R
τcyc dEm
5:
if CoT < CoTmin then
6:
CoTmin ←CoT, vsim ←(L × f)
7:
end if
8: end for
Second, experimental studies suggest that humans do not simply adapt to the assistance torque (Nor-
mand et al., 2023; Livolsi et al., 2025). For example, at the same walking speed, increasing the delay
parameter (∆t) from 0.15 s to 0.25 s results in a 1.5-fold increase in RMS assistive torque (Figure 6).
The RMS assistive torque is proportional to the hip joint angle (Equation 1). This indicates that hu-
mans actively modify their kinematics, such as increasing step size, to further utilize the assistance.
To reproduce this adaptive behavior, we develop the human–exoskeleton interaction (HEI) reward
based on a resistance-minimization hypothesis, which reflects the human tendency to avoid mechani-
cal power loss. This is inspired by the behavioral principle of loss aversion, which states that people
are more sensitive to losses than to equivalent profits (Kahneman, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman,
1991; Brown et al., 2024). Our HEI reward is formulated as follows:
rHEI = 1 + 1
κ
X
k∈{L,R}
min(0, Pk)
(8)
where Pk denotes the mechanical power applied by the exoskeleton on either the left or right side,
and κ is the gain parameter of the exoskeleton controller. Equation 8 takes effect when the exoskele-
ton applies resistive power to the human (Pk < 0), causing rHEI to drop below 1.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3.3
EXOSKELETON OPTIMIZER
The goal of the exoskeleton optimizer is to identify exoskeleton control parameters that minimize
CoT, meaning the parameters that provide the most effective assistance to humans wearing the ex-
oskeleton. Because the mapping between the control parameters and their resulting CoT is often
highly non-linear, previous methods (HILO) typically relies on gradient-free and sampling-based
optimization methods such as CMA-ES or Bayesian optimization (BO) (Slade et al., 2024; Gordon
et al., 2022). These methods are particularly effective in HILO settings, where data collection is
limited and expensive. For instance, BO often employs a Gaussian process (GP) as a surrogate
model to approximate the CoT and guide the search more efficiently. However, in our simulation-
based framework, where data can be generated as needed with low cost, the assumptions underlying
such sample-efficient methods no longer apply. While GP offer excellent performance in low-data
regimes, their poor scalability in both time and memory complexity makes them unsuitable for our
framework (see Appendix E). To take advantage of the data-rich simulation environment, we in-
stead use a neural network surrogate based on a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Neural networks
scale efficiently with data and support fast, gradient-based optimization, making them a better fit for
Exo-plore.
Algorithm 3 Optimizing exoskeleton control pa-
rameters
Require: Simulation parameter space X, Data
generator G, Target gait parameter g
Ensure: Optimal control parameter c∗
1: B ←∅
2: for xi ∈LHS(X) do
3:
τcyc ←rollout(G(L, f))
4:
y ←1
L
R
τcyc dEm
5:
B ←B ∪{(xi, y)}
6: end for
7: ˆfθ(c) ←fit(B)
8: c∗←arg minc ˆfθ(c; g)
9:
▷gradient-based optimization
Surrogate networks trained on a naive uniform
grid-sampled parameter set may exhibit arti-
facts due to the regularity of the sampling pat-
terns. In particular, grid-based sampling may
lead to aliasing effects and lacks the stochastic
variation. To mitigate these issues, we instead
use Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) (Forrester
et al., 2008), which stratifies each parameter
range and draws one sample per interval. This
stratification reduces aliasing and ensures uni-
form coverage without the clustering of random
sampling. Please refer to Appendix F for abla-
tion studies.
Algorithm 3 outlines the overall process of opti-
mizing the control parameters: For the simula-
tion parameter space X used in training the gait
data generator, we perform three steps: sam-
pling candidate parameters and their evaluation
through simulation (Line 2-5), training a surrogate network (Line 6), and performing gradient-based
optimization to minimize CoT given a target gait (Line 7).
To train the surrogate network, we minimize the following loss:
Lsurrogate = Lδh(ˆy, y) + λgrad ∥∇xˆy∥2
2 + λL1
X
i
|wi| + λL2
X
i
w2
i .
(9)
where ˆy is the predicted CoT value from the surrogate network, y is the ground truth value ob-
tained from simulation. We used Huber loss (Lδh) (Hastie et al., 2009) to reduce the effect of
outliers that may arise from the instability and stochasticity of the simulation. The gradient penalty
(∇xˆy) encourages smoothness of the surrogate landscape by constraining the norm of the output
gradient with respect to its input (Appendix G). In addition, the L1 and L2 weight penalties act as
standard regularizers. This formulation enables the trained surrogate network to generalize well in
predicting CoT values for unseen control parameters while ensuring stable gradient behavior. For
gradient-based optimization, we use sequential least-squares quadratic programming (SLSQP) and
trust-region algorithms. Please refer to Appendix H for the optimization objective.
4
RESULTS
4.1
SIMULATION SETUP
Simulation model.
We use the musculoskeletal model from prior work (Lee et al., 2019; Park
et al., 2022), which consists of 23 bones and 164 muscles. The bones are simulated as rigid bodies,
and the muscles are modeled as Hill-type muscle actuators (Hill, 1938). The simulation is performed
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
in the DART physics engine (Lee et al., 2018). In this model, tendons are represented as rigid
rather than compliant to reduce the computational burden induced by Deep RL. To further reduce
computational cost, we apply muscle actuation to the lower body only, while torque-based actuation
is used for the upper body. For more technical details about simulated model, see Appendix I.
Generalization to pathological gait.
We model five pathological gait conditions (calcaneal gait,
foot drop, equinus gait, crouch gait, and waddling gait) by implementing specific alterations to mus-
cle strength and contracture parameters. We trained separate Exo-plore models for each condition,
rather than employing a unified mixture-of-experts approach (Park et al., 2022). To enhance gener-
alization, we randomized simulation parameters during human controller training. Technical details
are provided in Appendix J.
4.2
GAIT GENERATION – UNASSISTED
We first validate whether our gait data generator can produce results that align with real human
experiments under the unassisted setup (i.e., κ = 0). This serves as a useful sanity check, since
several human experiments without assistance have been previously reported.
Figure 2: Comparison of joint kinematics over a gait cycle, with simulated results shown in red and
human experimental data in gray.
Figure 2 shows a comparison of joint kinematics between our simulated results and human experi-
ments (Boo et al., 2025), where the joint angles of the ankle, knee, and hip are reported. To obtain
the simulated results, we trained the gait data generator with multiple random seeds and averaged the
resulting joint angles over one gait cycle. Overall, joint kinematics qualitatively match with human
data, except for hip internal rotation. We suspect that this discrepancy occurred due to overfitting
of the Deep RL policy to the specific training environment, and thus it could be improved by mod-
ifying training conditions, such as changing the terrain of the environment. The kinematics of the
pathological gaits are shown in Appendix K.
Figure 3: Comparison of simulated and experimental muscle activations.
Figure 3 compares simulated and experimental muscle activations (Boo et al., 2025) over one gait
cycle. The results show that similar activation patterns to those observed in humans can be gen-
erated, even though we did not explicitly incorporate human muscle activation patterns into the
training process. Note that activation timing and patterns are more informative than absolute values
because muscle activations in human data (i.e., EMG signals) are normalized to each muscle’s max-
imum voluntary contraction, which can vary widely with setup. For more discussion, please refer
to Appendix L. In addition, we performed a detailed analysis of the ground reaction forces (GRF).
Additional information can be found in the Appendix M.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 4: Walking speed vs (CoT, Step length,
Step frequency)
Additionally, we demonstrate the importance of
choosing appropriate metabolic energy expen-
diture (MEE, Equation 3) parameters in Fig-
ure 4.
The leftmost figure shows the Walk-
ing speed – CoT curves obtained with differ-
ent parameter choices. The curve with the op-
timal parameters chosen by Algorithm 1 best
matches the human experiment results (Brown-
ing et al., 2006) in terms of overall trend and
PWS. The middle and rightmost figures show
the predicted gait parameters (step length and
step frequency) as walking speed increases.
The prediction results from our gait data gener-
ator match reasonably well with human exper-
iments (Schwartz et al., 2008), except for the
increased step frequency at low walking speeds
(< 4 km/h). This discrepancy might be because the Deep RL policy often had difficulty producing
gaits with short step lengths due to the simplified foot model (box-shaped and rigid), which often
caused unwanted collisions.
4.3
GAIT GENERATION – ASSISTED
Figure 5: Comparison of gait kinematics and dynamics under exoskeleton assistance between human
experimental results (top) and simulated results (bottom).
Figure 5 compares our simulation results with human experiments (Lim et al., 2019b) under ex-
oskeleton assistance with the control parameters (κ, ∆t) = (8 Nm, 0.25 s). Two kinematic results
(hip flexion angle and its velocity) and two dynamic results (assistive moment and power) are re-
ported, and the overall trends match reasonably across different walking speeds, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our framework. Although overall trends are consistent across all four results, gaps in
absolute values may result from discrepancies in musculoskeletal conditions between the simulated
character and human participants, as well as from potential overfitting of the Deep RL policy to the
fixed environment.
We incorporated the human-exoskeleton interaction (HEI) reward to better model human adapta-
tion to exoskeleton assistance. To validate its effectiveness, we conducted an ablation study and a
comparison with an alternative design choice like rassist or no rHEI (Appendix N). Figure 6 reports
RMS assistive moment, mean assistive power, and mean resistive power across different walking
speeds. In the human experiment (Lim et al., 2019b), the results resemble an increasing line, a
downward-opening parabola, and an upward-opening parabola, respectively. rHEI is our original
formulation based on resistance minimization, no rHEI means no HEI reward is incorporated, and
rassist means that assistance maximization is used. The results with our HEI reward show similar
trends to the human experiments and also yield the highest Pearson correlation with them. For ex-
ample, at 4 km/h, human experiments show a 1.88-fold increase in assistive power when the delay
increases from 0.05 s to 0.25 s. With rHEI, the result showed a similar 1.73-fold increase (correla-
tion = 0.83), whereas no rHEI and rassist showed weaker or inconsistent scaling (0.67- and 1.04-fold;
correlation = 0.69 and 0.23, respectively). Figure 7 shows the maximum metabolic reduction rate
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
achieved through exoskeleton assistance. Our HEI reward achieved the closest alignment with hu-
man experimental results (Lim et al., 2019b), whereas the others produced lower metabolic reduction
rate values, indicating that the simulated characters did not realize the same level of benefit observed
in human participants. Evaluated metabolic reduction rate in the simulation is slightly higher than in
human experimental data. Note that simulation metabolic reduction rate is computed relative to the
unassisted condition (κ = 0), whereas human experiments measure it relative to walking without an
exoskeleton, partly explaining the discrepancy. Additional details are provided in Appendix O.
Figure 6: Comparison of assistive moment, assistive power, and resistive
power across walking speeds, showing that our HEI reward (rHEI) repro-
duces the trends observed in human experiments and achieves the highest
correlation with empirical data.
Figure 7:
Compar-
ison
of
maximum
metabolic
reduction
rate.
4.4
OPTIMIZING EXOSKELETON CONTROL PARAMETERS
We demonstrate the applicability of Exo-plore by discovering and analyzing optimal exoskeleton
control parameters for both able-bodied and disabled individuals.
Able-bodied Individuals.
To optimize exoskeleton control parameters, we train a surrogate net-
work to learn the mapping between CoT (i.e., metabolic energy consumption per unit travel distance)
and the control parameters (κ: gain, ∆t: time delay). Figure 8(a-c) show the raw training data ob-
tained from simulation and the learned mappings with two gradient penalty settings (λgp = 0.1 and
λgp = 0.01), respectively. While the raw data contain many local minima from simulation stochas-
ticity and Deep RL training, the surrogate network provides a smoother landscape that enables faster
and more stable optimization while still capturing essential trends. A trade-off exists between small
and large gradient penalties: smaller penalties allow more aggressive optimization but risk overfit-
ting to artifacts, whereas larger penalties reduce this risk but may limit sensitivity. Figure 8(d) shows
the optimal control parameters obtained from the two surrogate networks. The optimized delay (∆t)
decreases monotonically as speed increases.
Figure 8: CoT landscape from raw simulation data (a), surrogate network trained with λgp = 0.1
(b), surrogate network trained with λgp = 0.01 (c), and optimized exoskeleton control parameters
(κ, left axis; ∆t, right axis) across walking speeds (d).
Disabled Individuals.
We evaluate our framework on musculoskeletal impairment profiles repre-
sentative of pathological gait. Pathology severity is quantified as the degree of deviation in muscle
parameters from healthy reference values. We examine five common pathological gait types: equi-
nus, waddling, crouch, calcaneus, and foot drop. Figure 9 presents the optimal gains (κ) identified
by Exo-plore, averaged across walking speeds from 2 to 3.5 km/h, with values reported for different
levels of pathology severity in each gait type. The optimal gains exhibit strong linear correlations
with severity across all conditions except foot drop.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
These correlations can be explained by the characteristics of each pathology. In equinus and wad-
dling gaits, characterized by toe-walking and lateral trunk sway, respectively, the pathological pat-
terns create greater instability compared to normal gait. External forces, such as exoskeleton as-
sistance, may amplify this instability, necessitating minimal and carefully controlled intervention.
In contrast, crouch and calcaneal gaits, characterized by excessive knee flexion and reduced ankle
plantarflexion, respectively, present stable but metabolically demanding kinematic patterns where
exoskeleton assistance effectively reduces energy expenditure without compromising stability. Foot
drop exhibited irregular trends causing frequent toe-ground collisions, which substantially increased
gait variability and prevented stable optimization convergence. Further detailed analysis is provided
in Appendix P.
Figure 9: Optimal exoskeleton gain over five pathological gait types, with values reported for differ-
ent levels of pathology severity in each gait type. Each color corresponds to different random seed.
Detailed numerical results are provided in Appendix P.4.
5
CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
Conclusion. This study developed Exo-plore, a simulation-based framework that optimizes ex-
oskeleton controllers through neuromechanical simulation and Deep RL. Through sim-to-real
matching, we demonstrated that Exo-plore can serve as an alternative to experimental trials for
controller optimization. Furthermore, by extending the framework to pathological gaits, Exo-plore
enables the design of exoskeleton controller for mobility-impaired individuals who are not suitable
for traditional human-in-the-loop optimization methods.
Limitations.
Despite these promising results, key limitations remain. Most importantly, exper-
imental validation with human subjects, including patient populations, is required to establish the
validity of simulation-based predictions and the clinical effectiveness of the optimized controllers.
Within our framework, several components warrant evidence of real-world impact, including simpli-
fied reward models and the current lack of personalization to subject-specific motor control, and the
use of approximate muscle dynamics (see Appendix R for details) that may fail to capture subject-
specific neuromuscular responses to assistance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grant funded by
the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2024-00450647). This work was also supported by the Insti-
tute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by
MSIT under Grant Nos. RS-2025-25442338 (AI Star Fellowship Support Program, Seoul National
University), RS-2021-II211343 (Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program, Seoul National
University), and IITP-2026-RS-2020-II201460 (ITRC: Information Technology Research Center).
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Code and videos available at https://daebangstn.github.io/exo-plore. The experi-
mental data used in this work are properly cited in their respective figures.
REFERENCES
BC Abbott and XM Aubert. The force exerted by active striated muscle during and after change of
length. The Journal of physiology, 117(1):77, 1952.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Farzad Abdolhosseini, Hung Yu Ling, Zhaoming Xie, Xue Bin Peng, and Michiel Van de Panne.
On learning symmetric locomotion. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on
Motion, Interaction and Games, pp. 1–10, 2019.
Marko Ackermann and Antonie J Van den Bogert. Optimality principles for model-based prediction
of human gait. Journal of biomechanics, 43(6):1055–1060, 2010.
Caitlin L Banks, Mihir M Pai, Theresa E McGuirk, Benjamin J Fregly, and Carolynn Patten.
Methodological choices in muscle synergy analysis impact differentiation of physiological char-
acteristics following stroke. Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 11:78, 2017.
Alex Bersani, Giorgio Davico, and Marco Viceconti. Modeling human suboptimal control: a review.
Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 39(5):294–303, 2023.
Junyo Boo, Dongwook Seo, Minseung Kim, and Seungbum Koo. Comprehensive human locomo-
tion and electromyography dataset: Gait120. Scientific Data, 12(1):1023, 2025.
Alexander L Brown, Taisuke Imai, Ferdinand M Vieider, and Colin F Camerer. Meta-analysis of
empirical estimates of loss aversion. Journal of Economic Literature, 62(2):485–516, 2024.
Raymond C. Browning, Emily A. Baker, Jessica A. Herron, and Rodger Kram. Effects of obesity
and sex on the energetic cost and preferred speed of walking. Journal of Applied Physiology, 100
(2):390–398, 2006. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00767.2005.
Gwendolyn M Bryan, Patrick W Franks, Seungmoon Song, Alexandra S Voloshina, Ricardo Reyes,
Meghan P O’Donovan, Karen N Gregorczyk, and Steven H Collins. Optimized hip–knee–ankle
exoskeleton assistance at a range of walking speeds. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilita-
tion, 18(1):152, 2021.
John W Chow and Warren G Darling. The maximum shortening velocity of muscle should be scaled
with activation. Journal of Applied Physiology, 86(3):1025–1031, 1999.
Friedl De Groote and Antoine Falisse. Perspective on musculoskeletal modelling and predictive
simulations of human movement to assess the neuromechanics of gait. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B, 288(1946):20202432, 2021.
Christopher L Dembia, Amy Silder, Thomas K Uchida, Jennifer L Hicks, and Scott L Delp. Simu-
lating ideal assistive devices to reduce the metabolic cost of walking with heavy loads. PloS one,
12(7):e0180320, 2017.
Vahid Firouzi, Andre Seyfarth, Seungmoon Song, Oskar von Stryk, and Maziar Ahmad Sharbafi.
Biomechanical models in the lower-limb exoskeletons development: A review. Journal of Neu-
roEngineering and Rehabilitation, 22(1):12, 2025.
Alexander Forrester, Andras Sobester, and Andy Keane. Engineering design via surrogate mod-
elling: a practical guide. John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Jacob R Gardner, Geoff Pleiss, David Bindel, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
Gpytorch: Blackbox matrix-matrix gaussian process inference with gpu acceleration. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Thomas Geijtenbeek. Scone: Open source software for predictive simulation of biological motion.
Journal of Open Source Software, 4(38):1421, 2019.
Daniel FN Gordon, Christopher McGreavy, Andreas Christou, and Sethu Vijayakumar. Human-in-
the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance via online simulation of metabolic cost. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 38(3):1410–1429, 2022.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Im-
proved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
2017.
Geoffrey G Handsfield, Craig H Meyer, Joseph M Hart, Mark F Abel, and Silvia S Blemker. Re-
lationships of 35 lower limb muscles to height and body mass quantified using mri. Journal of
biomechanics, 47(3):631–638, 2014.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome Friedman, et al. The elements of statistical learning, 2009.
Archibald Vivian Hill. The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series B-Biological Sciences, 126(843):136–195, 1938.
Fabian Horst, Djordje Slijepcevic, Marvin Simak, and Wolfgang I Sch¨ollhorn.
Gutenberg gait
database, a ground reaction force database of level overground walking in healthy individuals.
Scientific data, 8(1):232, 2021.
Kimberly A Ingraham, C David Remy, and Elliott J Rouse. The role of user preference in the
customized control of robotic exoskeletons. Science robotics, 7(64):eabj3487, 2022.
Daniel Kahneman. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica, 47:278,
1979.
Inseung Kang, Dean D Molinaro, Dongho Park, Dawit Lee, Pratik Kunapuli, Kinsey R Herrin, and
Aaron J Young. Online adaptation framework enables personalization of exoskeleton assistance
during locomotion in patients affected by stroke. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2025.
Jinsoo Kim, Franchino Porciuncula, Hee Doo Yang, Nicholas Wendel, Teresa Baker, Andrew Chin,
Terry D Ellis, and Conor J Walsh. Soft robotic apparel to avert freezing of gait in parkinson’s
disease. Nature medicine, 30(1):177–185, 2024.
Ava Lakmazaheri, Seungmoon Song, Brian B Vuong, Blake Biskner, Deborah M Kado, and
Steven H Collins. Optimizing exoskeleton assistance to improve walking speed and energy econ-
omy for older adults. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 21(1):1, 2024.
Jehee Lee. Representing rotations and orientations in geometric computing. IEEE Computer Graph-
ics and Applications, 28(2):75–83, 2008.
Jeongseok Lee, Michael X. Grey, Sehoon Ha, Tobias Kunz, Sumit Jain, Yuting Ye, Siddhartha S.
Srinivasa, Mike Stilman, and C. Karen Liu. DART: Dynamic animation and robotics toolkit.
The Journal of Open Source Software, 3(22):500, Feb 2018. doi: 10.21105/joss.00500. URL
https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00500.
Seungwhan Lee, Moonseok Park, Kyoungmin Lee, and Jehee Lee. Scalable muscle-actuated human
simulation and control. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG), 38(4):1–13, 2019.
Ung Hee Lee, Varun S Shetty, Patrick W Franks, Jie Tan, Georgios Evangelopoulos, Sehoon Ha,
and Elliott J Rouse. User preference optimization for control of ankle exoskeletons using sample
efficient active learning. Science Robotics, 8(83):eadg3705, 2023.
Bokman Lim, Junwon Jang, Jusuk Lee, Byungjune Choi, Younbaek Lee, and Youngbo Shim. De-
layed output feedback control for gait assistance and resistance using a robotic exoskeleton. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(4):3521–3528, 2019a.
Bokman Lim, Jusuk Lee, Junwon Jang, Kyungrock Kim, Young Jin Park, Keehong Seo, and
Youngbo Shim. Delayed output feedback control for gait assistance with a robotic hip exoskele-
ton. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 35(4):1055–1062, 2019b.
Chiara Livolsi, Roberto Conti, Tommaso Ciapetti, Eleonora Guanziroli, Thor Fridriksson, ´Asgeir
Alexandersson, Emilio Trigili, Francesco Giovacchini, Raffaele Molino Lova, Alberto Esquenazi,
et al.
Bilateral hip exoskeleton assistance enables faster walking in individuals with chronic
stroke-related gait impairments. Scientific Reports, 15(1):2017, 2025.
Shuzhen Luo, Menghan Jiang, Sainan Zhang, Junxi Zhu, Shuangyue Yu, Israel Dominguez Silva,
Tian Wang, Elliott Rouse, Bolei Zhou, Hyunwoo Yuk, et al. Experiment-free exoskeleton assis-
tance via learning in simulation. Nature, 630(8016):353–359, 2024.
J Maxwell Donelan, Rodger Kram, and Kuo Arthur D. Mechanical and metabolic determinants of
the preferred step width in human walking. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
B: Biological Sciences, 268(1480):1985–1992, 2001.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Dean D Molinaro, Keaton L Scherpereel, Ethan B Schonhaut, Georgios Evangelopoulos, Max K
Shepherd, and Aaron J Young. Task-agnostic exoskeleton control via biological joint moment
estimation. Nature, 635(8038):337–344, 2024.
Kiisa C Nishikawa, Jenna A Monroy, Theodore E Uyeno, Sang Hoon Yeo, Dinesh K Pai, and Stan L
Lindstedt. Is titin a ‘winding filament’? a new twist on muscle contraction. Proceedings of the
royal society B: Biological sciences, 279(1730):981–990, 2012.
Michael A Normand, Jeonghwan Lee, Hao Su, and James S Sulzer. The effect of hip exoskele-
ton weight on kinematics, kinetics, and electromyography during human walking. Journal of
biomechanics, 152:111552, 2023.
Carmichael F Ong, Thomas Geijtenbeek, Jennifer L Hicks, and Scott L Delp. Predicting gait adap-
tations due to ankle plantarflexor muscle weakness and contracture using physics-based muscu-
loskeletal simulations. PLoS computational biology, 15(10):e1006993, 2019.
Jungnam Park, Sehee Min, Phil Sik Chang, Jaedong Lee, Moon Seok Park, and Jehee Lee. Genera-
tive gaitnet. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–9, 2022.
Jungnam Park, Moon Seok Park, Jehee Lee, and Jungdam Won. Bidirectional gaitnet: A bidirec-
tional prediction model of human gait and anatomical conditions. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023
Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–9, 2023.
Jungnam Park, Euikyun Jung, Jehee Lee, and Jungdam Won. Magnet: Muscle activation generation
networks for diverse human movement. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers, pp. 1–11, 2025.
Katherine L Poggensee and Steven H Collins. How adaptation, training, and customization con-
tribute to benefits from exoskeleton assistance. Science Robotics, 6(58):eabf1078, 2021.
Apoorva Rajagopal, Christopher L Dembia, Matthew S DeMers, Denny D Delp, Jennifer L Hicks,
and Scott L Delp. Full-body musculoskeletal model for muscle-driven simulation of human gait.
IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, 63(10):2068–2079, 2016.
Boris Roszek and Peter A Huijing. Stimulation frequency history alters length-force characteristics
of fully recruited rat muscle. Journal of electromyography and kinesiology, 7(3):161–177, 1997.
Michael H Schwartz, Adam Rozumalski, and Joyce P Trost. The effect of walking speed on the gait
of typically developing children. Journal of biomechanics, 41(8):1639–1650, 2008.
Mohammad S Shourijeh and Benjamin J Fregly. Muscle synergies modify optimization estimates
of joint stiffness during walking. Journal of biomechanical engineering, 142(1):011011, 2020.
Patrick Slade, Mykel J Kochenderfer, Scott L Delp, and Steven H Collins. Personalizing exoskeleton
assistance while walking in the real world. Nature, 610(7931):277–282, 2022.
Patrick Slade, Christopher Atkeson, J Maxwell Donelan, Han Houdijk, Kimberly A Ingraham,
Myunghee Kim, Kyoungchul Kong, Katherine L Poggensee, Robert Riener, Martin Steinert, et al.
On human-in-the-loop optimization of human–robot interaction. Nature, 633(8031):779–788,
2024.
Seungmoon Song and Steven H Collins. Optimizing exoskeleton assistance for faster self-selected
walking. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 29:786–795,
2021.
Seungmoon Song and Hartmut Geyer. A neural circuitry that emphasizes spinal feedback generates
diverse behaviours of human locomotion. The Journal of physiology, 593(16):3493–3511, 2015.
Seungmoon Song and Hartmut Geyer. Evaluation of a neuromechanical walking control model
using disturbance experiments. Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 11:15, 2017.
Seungmoon Song, Łukasz Kidzi´nski, Xue Bin Peng, Carmichael Ong, Jennifer Hicks, Sergey
Levine, Christopher G Atkeson, and Scott L Delp. Deep reinforcement learning for modeling
human locomotion control in neuromechanical simulation. Journal of neuroengineering and re-
habilitation, 18(1):126, 2021.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Chun Kwang Tan, Cheryl Wang, Shirui Lyu, Balint K Hodossy, Pierre Schumacher, Elizabeth B
Wilson, Vittorio Caggiano, Vikash Kumar, Dario Farina, Letizia Gionfrida, et al.
Myoassist
0.1: Myosuite for dexterity and agility in bionic humans. In 2025 International Conference On
Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), pp. 437–442. IEEE, 2025.
Jie Tan, Karen Liu, and Greg Turk. Stable proportional-derivative controllers. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 31(4):34–44, 2011.
Lena H Ting and Stacie A Chvatal. Decomposing muscle activity in motor tasks. Motor control:
theories, experiments, and applications, pp. 102–138, 2010.
Matthew C Tresch, Philippe Saltiel, and Emilio Bizzi. The construction of movement by the spinal
cord. Nature neuroscience, 2(2):162–167, 1999.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-dependent
model. The quarterly journal of economics, 106(4):1039–1061, 1991.
Brian R Umberger and Philip E Martin. Mechanical power and efficiency of level walking with
different stride rates. Journal of Experimental Biology, 210(18):3255–3265, 2007.
Cara Gonzalez Welker, Alexandra S Voloshina, Vincent L Chiu, and Steven H Collins. Shortcomings
of human-in-the-loop optimization of an ankle-foot prosthesis emulator: a case series. Royal
Society open science, 8(5):202020, 2021.
Kirby A Witte, Pieter Fiers, Alison L Sheets-Singer, and Steven H Collins. Improving the energy
economy of human running with powered and unpowered ankle exoskeleton assistance. Science
Robotics, 5(40):eaay9108, 2020.
Jungdam Won and Jehee Lee. Learning body shape variation in physics-based characters. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(6):1–12, 2019.
MY Zarrugh, FN Todd, and HJ Ralston. Optimization of energy expenditure during level walking.
European journal of applied physiology and occupational physiology, 33(4):293–306, 1974.
Juanjuan Zhang, Pieter Fiers, Kirby A Witte, Rachel W Jackson, Katherine L Poggensee, Christo-
pher G Atkeson, and Steven H Collins. Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance
during walking. Science, 356(6344):1280–1284, 2017.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
ARCHITECTURE OF HUMAN CONTROLLER
Figure A.1: The human controller computes muscle activations from the musculoskeletal simulation
state and applies them back to the simulation.
B
DETAILS OF THE RL FORMULATION FOR POSENET
B.1
STATE REPRESENTATION
• Kinematics (R349): All simulated rigid bodies are represented in a root-centered local
coordinate frame, including their relative positions, orientations, and linear and angular
velocities. Phase-based mirroring is applied to account for gait symmetry (Abdolhosseini
et al., 2019).
– Root height: R1
– Root linear velocities: R3
– Body part positions: R69
– Body part rotations: R138
– Body part linear velocities: R69
– Body part angular velocities: R69
• Gait features (R9):
– Target foot position: R3
– Foot contact state: R2
– Target gait velocity: R1
– Current/Target/Reference gait phase: R3
• Muscle-related terms (R59): Passive muscle forces, lower and upper torque bounds per
joint, and dynamic muscle-specific parameters like muscle length.
– Muscle weakness and contracture: R5
– Passive forces: R18
– Torque bounds: R36
• Exoskeleton assist torque history: (R64): Recent history of assistive torques applied at
the hip joints (left/right), representing the temporal profile of exoskeletal assistance to the
human.
B.2
ACTION REPRESENTATION
As in Park et al. (2022), we employ the residual pose action formulation. The action consists of pose
and phase modulation:
A = (∆ϕ, ∆M) ,
(10)
where ∆M denotes the pose displacement, and ∆ϕ represents the phase increment that either ad-
vances or delays gait phase with respect to the reference gait motion.
The gait phase(ϕ) and target pose(M(ϕ)) for the PD controller is then updated according to
ϕt+1 = ϕt + ∆ϕ,
Mt = Mref ⊕∆M.
(11)
where Mref denotes the reference motion (obtained from Park et al. (2022)) and ⊕denotes the
operation between a pose and a displacement, which includes operations in SO(3) to properly update
3D rotations. For more technical details, refer to Lee (2008)
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B.3
REWARD DESIGN
We use a composite reward consisting of four terms:
rtotal = wgait · rgait + wenergy · renergy + warm · rarm + wHEI · rHEI
(12)
Since we previously mentioned renergy and rHEI we now discuss the remaining one. There are four
terms in the rgait = rstep ·rvel ·rhead ·rsway. Specifically, rstep and rvel, encourage the agent to maintain
a target step size and walking velocity:
rstep = exp

−(∥h −hdesired∥/σstep)2
,
rvel = exp

−(∥v −vdesired∥/σvel)2
.
(13)
Here, h denotes the current foot position, and v denotes the average forward walking velocity of
the simulated character. Both values are compared against their respective targets to guide the agent
toward producing the desired gait pattern.
Humans generally maintain head stability during walking, as key sensory systems like vision and
balance are located there. rhead encourages consistent head motion by penalizing abrupt changes in
head angle, linear acceleration, and angular acceleration.
rhead = fr · fv · fω,
fr = kalive + (1 −kalive) exp

−(θhead/σhead)2
,
if θhead > λr, else 1,
fv = kalive + (1 −kalive) exp

−(alin/σhead)2
,
if alin > λv, else 1,
fω = kalive + (1 −kalive) exp

−(aang/σhead)2
,
if aang > λω, else 1.
(14)
Here, θhead denotes the head orientation with respect to the frame aligned to the progression direction
and the global up direction. alin and aang represent the linear and angular accelerations of the head,
respectively.
To prevent the emergence of unrealistic gait patterns due to model inaccuracies or excessive energy
minimization, a sway reward discourages abnormal deviations in musculoskeletal body orientations,
promoting kinematics that remain close to typical human walking behavior.
rsway,b = exp

−

|qb−¯qb|−δb
σsway
2
if |qb −¯qb| ≤δb, 1 otherwise,
rsway =
Y
b∈B
rsway,b,
B = {pelvis, spine, foot}.
(15)
where qb denotes the angle of body b, ¯qb is the angle derived from normative gait data, and δb
represents the deviation threshold for body b. The total sway reward Rsway is computed as the
product of body-wise sway terms rsway,b across joints.
To promote natural arm movements during gait, we introduce an upper-arm imitation reward. This
reward measures the deviation between the simulated and reference upper-arm joint angles, encour-
aging the musculoskeletal model to align its arm posture with the reference motion. The reward is
computed as:
rarm = exp

−
X
j∈arm
(∥ˆqj −qj∥/σarm)2


(16)
where ˆqj denotes the joint angle of joint j j in the reference motion Mref, qj represents the current
joint angle.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B.4
TRAINING CURVES
Figure B.2: Training curves of each reward component. Shaded regions indicate ±2σ over n = 5
runs.
C
INTRAMUSCULAR REGULARIZATION ENHANCES PHYSIOLOGICAL
PLAUSIBILITY OF MUSCLE ACTIVATION
In this section, we investigate how LIMR affects both the training dynamics and the actual activations
computed by the MCN. As shown in Figure C.3, during the training process with the intramuscular
regularizer (IMR), the IMR-specific loss decreased steadily while the activation discrepancies across
line segments of the same anatomical muscle also diminished. In contrast, training without the IMR
often led to large differences between line-muscle activations where human experimental data does
not show (Ong et al., 2019). Although the baseline MCN loss includes an activation regularizer
that prevents over-reliance on individual muscles, this alone was insufficient to avoid highly imbal-
anced segment activations. Such imbalances are physiologically implausible, since humans cannot
selectively control individual line segments of a single muscle. Therefore, the IMR is essential for
producing activation patterns that are both stable and physiologically plausible.
Figure C.3: LIMR over training epochs (a), Line-wise activation profiles (colored) across the gait
cycle, in comparison with human data (b)
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D
DETERMINING METABOLIC ENERGY EXPENDITURE PARAMETERS
Figure D.4: Selection of MEE exponents param-
eter pair (α, β) based on resulting PWS.
We selected the MEE exponent parameter pair
(α, β) = (1.5, 1.0). For each pair, we trained
multiple data generators with different random
seeds and computed the resulting PWS using
Algorithm 2. Figure D.4 shows the result which
revealed that α had a significant influence on
the simulated preferred walking speed (PWS),
whereas β had relatively little effect. There-
fore, we chose α = 1.5, which produced a PWS
closest to the human reference value (vreal =
1.25 m/s). For β, we selected a value of 1.0 to
ensure that metabolic cost scaled linearly with
muscle mass, allowing the total cost to remain
consistent regardless of whether mass was con-
sidered per-muscle or globally.
E
LIMITATIONS OF GAUSSIAN PROCESSES AS A SURROGATE MODEL
E.1
GAUSSIAN PROCESSES CONSUME EXCESSIVE MEMORY
We conduct a feasibility comparison between Gaussian processes (GP) and neural network (NN) by
analyzing peak runtime memory consumption. For a fair comparison, we employed a GPU-based
GP implementation (Gardner et al., 2018). All experiments were conducted on an RTX 3070 GPU.
Since GP require O(N 2) memory, datasets larger than 20k samples exceeded the GPU VRAM limit
(8GB).
dataset size
GP (MB)
NN (MB)
20,000
Out-of-memory
538
10,000
2232
360
500
258
226
Table E.1: Comparison of peak runtime memory usage between GP and NN.
E.2
DATASET SIZE REQUIRED FOR PLAUSIBLE RESULTS EXCEEDS GP’S COMPUTATIONAL
LIMIT
Figure E.5 illustrates the relationship between optimized exoskeleton parameters and the size of the
training dataset when using a neural network as a surrogate. With 5k and 10k sample sizes, the result-
ing optimization landscapes are noisy and contain unrealistic local minima, making them unsuitable
for robust parameter selection. Increasing the dataset size to 20k samples improves the smoothness
and plausibility of the parameter predictions; however, the memory requirements quickly become
prohibitive for GP (see Appendix E.1). In contrast, neural network surrogates can efficiently uti-
lize large datasets with relatively low computational resources, enabling stable and physiologically
plausible optimization results.
Figure E.5: Exoskeleton controller optimization results across different dataset sizes (5k, 10k, 20k,
and 60k parameter samples).
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
F
HUBER LOSS AND LATIN HYPERCUBE SAMPLING ARE REQUIRED FOR
SMOOTH SURROGATE NETWORK LANDSCAPE
Figure F.6 shows the surrogate network landscape across walking speeds. Our proposed combination
of Huber loss and Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) produces the smoothest landscape compared
to other approaches. The MSE-based surrogate network exhibited excessive sensitivity to noisy gait
data, resulting in jagged cost landscapes, especially at higher exoskeleton gains (κ), where external
assistance amplifies gait variability. Similarly, the surrogate network trained on uniformly sampled
data displayed aliasing artifacts due to poor sample coverage, despite using the same sample size
(N = 60k).
Figure F.6: Landscape of CoT from gait data generator across walking speeds and exoskeleton
gains (κ) normalized to the exoskeleton-off condition (first panel). Surrogate predictions under
different training setups: Our proposed configuration (second panel) yields a smoother landscape
than alternative approaches (third and forth panels).
G
MOTIVATION OF THE GRADIENT PENALTY LOSS OF THE EXOSKELETON
OPTIMIZER
This penalty is motivated by the Lipschitz condition:
∥f(x1) −f(x2)∥≤∥x1 −x2∥
∀x1, x2 ∈X,
∥f(x1) −f(x2)∥
∥x1 −x2∥
≤1,
lim
x2→x1
∥f(x1) −f(x2)∥
∥x1 −x2∥
= ∥∇f(x1)∥≤1.
(17)
A small gradient norm implies local Lipschitz continuity, and a uniform bound on the gradient norm
ensures global Lipschitz continuity (Gulrajani et al., 2017). Enforcing this property prevents abrupt
shifts in predicted CoT values across the parameter space and yields stable gradients that can be
exploited by downstream optimization.
H
OPTIMIZING EXOSKELETON WITH SURROGATE NETWORK
Let {gn}M
n=1 denote the set of gait parameters. κn and ∆tn are the optimal parameters corresponding
to each gn, and the optimization is performed with the following objective:
L(κn, ∆tn) =
M
X
n=1
ˆy(gn; κn, ∆tn)
+ λ1
M
X
n=1
|κn| + λ2
M−1
X
n=1

|κn+1 −κn| + |∆tn+1 −∆tn|

.
(18)
Here, ˆy represents the surrogate-predicted metabolic cost of transport. However, surrogate predic-
tions can exhibit minor fluctuations across the parameter space due to the inherent complexity of
the energy landscape or errors introduced during model training. These fluctuations can lead to
abrupt variations in the exoskeleton control parameters when optimizing solely for CoT. To miti-
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
gate this issue, we introduce two additional regularization terms. The first regularizer discourages
extreme parameter magnitudes, while the second promotes smooth variation of solutions across
speeds. Together, these regularizers ensure that the optimized parameters minimize metabolic cost
while remaining realistic and consistent across varying gait parameters. All hyperparameters used
in the exoskeleton optimizer are provided in Appendix T.
I
SIMULATION MODEL
I.1
SIMULATED CHARACTER
Key muscle parameters, including isometric force and tendon slack length, were adjusted to match
the OpenSim model by Rajagopal et al. (2016), and muscle mass distributions followed the estimates
of Handsfield et al. (2014). The simulated subject’s body mass and height were set to match average
values reported in the target exoskeleton study (Lim et al., 2019a). Anthropometric data are provided
in Table I.2.
Item
Unit
Value
Height
cm
169
Mass
kg
72.9
Table I.2: Physical properties of the musculoskeletal character.
I.2
EXOSKELETON
We adopted Samsung Electronics’ gait enhancing and motivating system (GEMS) (Lim et al.,
2019b;a). See Table I.3 for mechanical properties.
Item
Unit
Value
Body segment
kg
1.7
Thigh segment
kg
0.6
Total mass∗
kg
2.3
Table I.3: Physical properties of the exoskeleton.
∗The total mass differs slightly from Lim et al. (2019a) because we imposed a minimum mass of 50 g
on each exoskeleton element to prevent numerical instability caused by nearly singular dynamics
when solving Newton’s equations.
In the human controller of the data generator, the stable PD controller computes the final desired
joint torque as:
τ (j)
MCN = τ (j)
PD −τ (j)
exo
∀j ∈Jhip.
(19)
where τexo denotes the torque applied by the exoskeleton, τPD denotes computed torque from the
PD-target in the PD-controller and τMCN serves as the input to the MCN for computing muscle
activations. This formulation ensures that the MCN receives only the net torque required for joint
motion, effectively reflecting the dynamics under exoskeletal assistance.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameters for the simulation are displayed in Table J.4. Gait parameters and exoskeleton control pa-
rameters are uniformly sampled, while muscle parameters are sampled in an adaptive manner (Won
& Lee, 2019). Adaptive sampling is a training technique in reinforcement learning that adjusts
the parameter sampling rate during RL training based on the learning difficulty of each parameter.
Specifically, the muscle parameter sampling interval is divided into 8 bins. For each bin, we evaluate
the average episode length of the human controller while training. If some bins have lower average
episode lengths than other bins, we increase the sampling rate for those bins.
Category
Name
Unit
Range
Muscle
parameter
Muscle weakness
(maximum isometric force)
Triceps surae (Calcaneous)
N.A.
[0, 0.4]
Tibialis anterior (Footdrop)
N.A.
[0, 0.5]
Gluteal muscles (Waddling)
N.A.
[0, 0.4]
Muscle contracture
(optimal muscle fiber length)
Triceps surae (Equinus)
N.A.
[0.73, 1]
Psoas (Crouch)
N.A.
[0.55, 1]
Gait
parameter
Step length
cm
[13.4, 93.8]
Step frequency
spm
[1.27, 2.55]
Exoskeleton
control
parameter
Gain (κ)
Nm
[0, 21]
Delay (∆t)
sec
[0, 0.5]
Table J.4: Simulation parameter name and its range.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
K
GENERATED PATHOLOGICAL GAIT KINEMATICS
Figure K.7: Comparison of simulation results between normal muscle conditions and each patho-
logical condition.
Exo-plore was trained with pathological muscle conditions using parameters specified in Ap-
pendix J, and the resulting gait patterns are presented in Figure K.7. Rendered images with descrip-
tive annotations are provided to facilitate understanding of each pathological condition. Close-up
images of the feet include ground reaction force visualization to illustrate contact states during the
gait cycle.
We compare pathological gaits with unimpaired gait to clearly show deviation patterns.
For pathological gait cases, the walking speed was fixed at 3.5 km/h to ensure consistent comparison
across severities. In contrast, for unimpaired gait, we used the preferred walking speed (PWS)
identified by Algorithm 2, and selected gait parameters that minimized the CoT at that speed.
Name
Cause
Description
Equinus
Contracture in
Triceps surae
Walking on the toes due to persistent plantarflex-
ion of the ankle.
The heel does not touch the
ground during gait.
Waddling
Weakness in
Gluteus
Swaying of the trunk from side to side while walk-
ing due to weakness of the gluteal muscles, which
fail to stabilize the pelvis. This gait is also referred
to as a waddling or “duck-like” gait.
Crouch
Contracture in
Psoas
Walking in a flexed, crouched posture, which
maintains the hips in persistent flexion, often ac-
companied by knee flexion.
Calcaneous
Weakness in
Triceps surae
Walking with the heel contacting the ground first
due to weakness of the triceps surae muscles, lead-
ing to excessive dorsiflexion of the ankle.
Footdrop
Weakness in
Tibialis anterior
Inability to dorsiflex the ankle during foot-off, re-
sulting in the toes dragging on the ground. Pa-
tients often compensate with high-stepping gait.
Table K.5: Types of pathological gait patterns, their causes, and descriptions.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
L
OVERACTIVATION OF THE RECTUS FEMORIS IN THE SIMULATION
Figure 3 shows the muscle activation of rectus femoris (RF) have the largest sim-to-real gap. Sim-
ulated RF is activated much more than humans typically utilize it, especially around the foot-off
phase. This increased activation of the RF in the gait data generator is related to the superior motor
performance of the human controller, as mentioned earlier. Humans tend to control the RF together
with the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis, as these muscles are located close to each other and
work in coordination, rather than using it independently. Consequently, human activation data shows
that these three muscles are activated in similar patterns. However, the RF, being a biarticular mus-
cle, can move two joints and is more metabolically efficient when activated alone. This provides
an incentive for the controller to actively utilize it. To investigate this, we trained the human con-
troller while artificially deactivating the RF, and while kinematics remained nearly unchanged, we
observed a slightly higher (∼4%) CoT (See Figure L.8). Therefore, to address the excessive use of
the RF, an additional regularizer that reflects the limitations of human motor control, such as synergy
control (Tresch et al., 1999; Ting & Chvatal, 2010; Banks et al., 2017; Shourijeh & Fregly, 2020),
should be applied.
Figure L.8: Inclusion of rectus femoris in the model reduces normalized cost of transport compared
to the deactivated rectus femoris condition.
M
GROUND REACTION FORCE OF UNASSISTED GAIT
Figure M.9: Comparison of simulated and experimental ground reaction forces (GRF).
Figure M.9 compares the simulated and experimental ground reaction forces (GRF) (Horst et al.,
2021) over a single stance cycle, with all forces normalized by body weight (BW) for consistency
with the reference human data. Overall, the simulated GRF profiles exhibit characteristic patterns
similar to those observed in human locomotion. The primary discrepancy appears in the vertical
component, where the simulation produces a sharper peak than the experimental measurements.
This difference likely arises from structural modeling: while the human foot features an arched and
compliant architecture that distributes load more gradually, our simulation employs a box-shaped
rigid element, resulting in a more abrupt transfer of force during stance.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
N
ALTERNATIVE HEI REWARDS
• Assist Maximization: Encourages the agent to align with assistive power by promoting
positive power contributions:
rHEI = rassist = 1
Z
X
s∈{L,R}
max(0, Ps)
(20)
• No HEI Reward: With rHEI = 0, the human is modeled as minimizing metabolic en-
ergy expenditure without incorporating any additional considerations related to exoskeletal
assistance.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
O
HEI MAKES HIGHER METABOLIC REDUCTION RATE THAN THE
ALTERNATIVE MODELS
Figure 7 demonstrates that our HEI reward accurately predicts the metabolic reduction rate (MRR)
achieved through exoskeleton assistance. This finding may appear counterintuitive, as the HEI re-
ward does not explicitly regulate metabolic energy expenditure. Furthermore, one might expect
the HEI reward to impede metabolic reduction by exoskeleton, given its potential competition with
renergy, which directly minimizes metabolic energy consumption. To investigate this apparent para-
dox, we analyze the relationship between gait parameters and their metabolic benefits as follows:
Benefit = CoT(κ = 0) −min
 CoT(κ > 0)

(21)
Figure O.10 reveals that the maximum normalized Benefit remains consistent across different HEI
reward configurations. While the mean values are nearly identical across reward conditions, the
gait parameters at which these maxima occur differ significantly. In the absence of HEI, the max-
imum Benefit coincides with the highest cost of transport (CoT) values. This observation aligns
with expectations, as renergy primarily aims to reduce MEE, leading the human controller to learn
exoskeleton utilization strategies at parameters corresponding to maximum CoT.
In contrast, when our proposed HEI reward is employed, the maximum benefit occurs at large gait
parameters (Step frequency=2.5 Hz, Step length=0.6 m, walking speed=5.2 km/h) than former. This
phenomenon can be attributed to the enhanced effectiveness of the HEI reward at higher walking
speeds, where exoskeleton assistance power is relatively elevated. Consequently, the human con-
troller learns to exploit exoskeleton assistance more effectively under these conditions, resulting in
higher measured MRR values despite the lower baseline CoT. This finding is consistent with human
experimental studies (Lim et al., 2019b), which report maximum MRR at relatively high walking
speeds of 4 km/h.
Figure O.10: Comparison of the simulated cost of transport (top), Benefit (middle) and metabolic
reduction rate (bottom) between our proposed HEI reward(rHEI) and the alternatives (rassist, no
rHEI).
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
P
OPTIMAL EXOSKELETON GAIN TRENDS IN PATHOLOGICAL GAIT
P.1
PATHOLOGY-SPECIFIC TRENDS IN OPTIMAL GAIN
Although the absolute scale of the optimal gain differed between pathological gait data generator,
the gains consistently follow severity-dependent trends. This suggests that pathology-specific gain
patterns can serve as distinguishing characteristics, since the gain trend is less sensitive to surrogate
hyperparameters than the absolute gain value. Based on these trends, we identified two distinct
groups reflecting fundamentally different assistance requirements:
Group A (Benefit from hip exoskeleton).
Crouch and calcaneus gaits show increasing optimal
gains with severity. Crouch gait, caused by psoas contracture, maintains stable but energetically
expensive postures with sustained knee and hip flexion. Similarly, calcaneus gait from triceps surae
weakness results in heel-walking, relying heavily on hip flexion to compensate for the inability
to plantarflex the ankle. Both conditions feature stable but metabolically demanding gait patterns
where exoskeleton assistance effectively reduces energy expenditure without compromising stabil-
ity.
Group B (Limited benefit from hip exoskeleton).
Equinus and waddling gaits exhibit decreasing
optimal gains with severity. Equinus, resulting from triceps surae contracture, causes inherently
unstable toe-walking where external forces exacerbate balance issues. Waddling gait, stemming
from gluteus weakness, involves lateral trunk sway for pelvic stabilization, where compensatory
strategy that external hip assistance can disrupt. These pathologies prioritize maintaining precarious
stability over energy optimization, making them less amenable to hip exoskeleton intervention.
Footdrop presents a unique case with no clear severity correlation. While hip exoskeleton assistance
was expected to benefit the compensatory high-stepping pattern, the frequent toe-ground collisions
during toe-off introduced substantial gait variability, preventing stable optimization convergence.
Detailed discussion is provided in Appendix P.2.
This classification reveals a fundamental principle: pathologies with stable but energy-intensive
compensation patterns (Group A) benefit from increasing assistance, while those with unstable com-
pensation mechanisms (Group B) require minimal intervention to preserve their delicate balance
strategies. Thus, effective exoskeleton prescription depends not on pathology severity alone, but on
the underlying stability-energy trade-off inherent to each condition’s biomechanical adaptation.
P.2
THE CAUSE OF UNCLEAR TREND OF FOOT DROP IS EXCESSIVE GAIT VARIABILITY OF
FOOT DROP
Foot drop did not follow a clear trend due to its inherently unstable gait dynamics. This pathology,
characterized by insufficient toe clearance from tibialis anterior weakness, leads to frequent toe-
ground collisions that substantially increase gait variability. As shown in Figure P.11, severe foot
drop exhibited a coefficient of variation (CV) in CoT nearly four times higher than that of other
pathologies. While most conditions maintained consistent CV values across severity levels, foot
drop’s variability increased dramatically with severity. This elevated stochasticity in the simulated
gait, arising from unpredictable toe-catching events, obscures any systematic relationship between
pathology severity and optimal exoskeleton gain.
Figure P.11: The foot drop pathology exhibits the highest coefficient of variation among all pathol-
ogy types.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
P.3
EFFECT OF HEI REWARD ON OPTIMAL GAIN TRENDS
The HEI reward (rHEI) proved essential for capturing clinically relevant exoskeleton optimization
outcomes. For example, calcaneus gait, which should benefit from assistance due to its high hip
muscle demands, only showed the expected positive correlation (Group A) when rHEI was included.
Without this reward term, calcaneus incorrectly appeared in Group B with decreasing gains, despite
maintaining strong linearity. This demonstrates that rHEI is a necessary component for revealing
the true biomechanical characteristics of pathological gait, ensuring that optimization captures the
actual assistance needs.
Figure P.12: Our proposed HEI reward reverses the average optimal gain trend with respect to
pathology severity.
P.4
R2 VALUES FOR LINEAR FITS OF OPTIMAL GAIN ACROSS PATHOLOGY SEVERITIES
In the Table P.6, we examined the linear relationship between optimal exoskeleton gain and pathol-
ogy severity by calculating Pearson’s R² values across different random seeds.
Category
Seed
R2
Equinus
seed1
0.972
seed2
0.914
seed3
0.787
seed4
0.941
Waddling
seed1
0.574
seed2
0.930
seed3
0.991
seed4
0.825
Crouch
seed1
0.949
seed2
0.611
seed3
0.875
seed4
0.956
Category
Seed
R2
Calcaneus
seed1
0.944
seed2
0.589
seed3
0.885
seed4
0.845
Foot drop
seed1
0.509
seed2
0.711
seed3
0.808
seed4
0.321
Calcaneus
(no rHEI)
seed1
0.819
seed2
0.845
seed3
0.923
seed4
0.708
Table P.6: Pearson’s R2 values for linearity between optimal exoskeleton gain and pathology sever-
ity.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Q
ANTHROPOMORPHIC CONSISTENCY BETWEEN REAL AND SIMULATED
DATA
To validate the consistency between simulation and experiment, we confirmed that the anthropomet-
ric parameters of our simulated character match those of subjects in the real datasets. As shown in
Table Q.7, the model’s height and weight fall within the natural variability of the populations in all
referenced datasets, indicating that these datasets are appropriate for use in our comparisons.
Dataset
Height (cm)
Weight (kg)
n=
Simulation
169
72.9
–
Kinematics (Boo et al., 2025)
173.2 ± 5.6
74.1 ± 12.5
120
GEMS (Lim et al., 2019b)
173 ± 8.2
68.4 ± 6.3
5
GRF (Horst et al., 2021)
176 ± 9
70.7 ± 12.0
350
Table Q.7: Comparison between the anthropometric parameters of the simulated character and real
human datasets.
R
LIMITATIONS OF HILL TYPE MUSCLE DYNAMICS.
The Hill muscle model, which was originally proposed based on experiments on frog muscle in
1938 (Hill, 1938), has since been used as the mathematical description of muscle in almost all
musculoskeletal simulation studies. In this section, we discuss the limitations of the simulation that
arise from the known shortcomings of the Hill muscle model.
The contractile force of a Hill-type muscle is formulated as follows:
f = f(l, ˙l, a) = a · fl(l) · fv(˙l) + fp(l),
where fl, fv, and fp represent the force–length, force–velocity, and passive force–length rela-
tionships, respectively. The variables l and a denote the muscle fibre length and activation level.
Hill’s original experiments imply that these three factors—activation, length, and shortening ve-
locity—contribute independently to muscle force generation. Despite its wide adoption, several
important limitations of the Hill model have been identified.
Inability to reproduce history-dependent behavior.
Real muscles exhibit clear history-
dependent behavior. When a muscle is stretched, the resulting contractile force exceeds the force
produced when the muscle is activated directly at the same length. This phenomenon is known
as force enhancement following stretch. Conversely, active shortening results in force depression.
Because the Hill muscle model is stateless, it cannot reproduce these history-dependent proper-
ties (Abbott & Aubert, 1952; Nishikawa et al., 2012).
This limitation becomes particularly problematic in the simulation of fast running. During high-
speed locomotion, muscles such as the hamstrings and calf muscles are activated while being
stretched at ground contact. In real muscles, this stretch-induced force enhancement allows them
to sustain substantially higher forces at a lower energetic cost, enabling rapid and efficient running.
In contrast, Hill-based simulations underestimate the available force and overestimate metabolic
expenditure, thereby producing a significant sim-to-real gap.
Lack of activation-dependent changes in muscle parameters.
Experimental studies have shown
that key muscle parameters, such as optimal fibre length (Roszek & Huijing, 1997) and maximum
shortening velocity (Chow & Darling, 1999), depend on the activation level of the muscle. However,
in the Hill muscle model these quantities are typically treated as fixed constants.
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
S
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON BETWEEN SIMULATED AND
EXPERIMENTAL DATA
To evaluate the similarity between the simulated and experimental time-series data, we report three
metrics: the normalized root-mean-square error (NRMSE), the Pearson correlation coefficient (R),
and a normalized dynamic time warping (NDTW) distance.
The NRMSE quantifies the overall magnitude error between the two signals and is normalized by the
range of the experimental data, allowing comparisons across different variables. Lower NRMSE val-
ues indicate better amplitude agreement. The R measures the similarity in waveform shape between
the signals, independent of scale. Values closer to 1 indicate stronger similarity in the temporal
pattern. The NDTW distance assesses temporal alignment between the two signals while allow-
ing local time stretching or compression. The distance is normalized by the amplitude range and
warping-path length, so smaller values indicate closer temporal correspondence.
S.1
UNASSISTED GAIT
Joint
NRMSE
R
NDTW
Ankle Dorsiflexion
0.563
0.892
0.200
Knee Flexion
0.185
0.966
0.108
Hip Flexion
0.210
0.965
0.068
Hip Abduction
0.244
0.777
0.067
Hip Internal Rotation
1.436
-0.443
1.019
Table S.8: Similarity metrics between simulated and real joint kinematics.
Muscle
NRMSE
R
NDTW
Bicep Femoris Longus
0.799
0.835
0.266
Bicep Femoris Short
0.533
-0.216
0.344
Gastrocnemius Lateral Head
0.531
0.775
0.129
Gastrocnemius Medial Head
0.348
0.605
0.057
Soleus
0.419
0.575
0.086
Gluteus Maximus
1.296
0.207
1.254
Gluteus Medius
0.283
0.574
0.025
Vastus Lateralis
0.271
0.634
0.061
Vastus Medialis
0.366
0.649
0.151
Rectus Femoris
5.565
-0.430
2.040
Tibialis Anterior
1.780
0.516
0.395
Peroneus Brevis
0.321
0.823
0.097
Peroneus Longus
0.223
0.931
0.072
Semitendinosus
0.596
0.353
0.117
Table S.9: Similarity metrics between simulated and real muscle activations.
GRF Axis
NRMSE
R
NDTW
Vertical
0.216
0.563
0.057
Medial-Lateral
0.159
0.807
0.039
Anterior-Posterior
0.113
0.923
0.028
Table S.10: Similarity metrics between simulated and real ground reaction forces.
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
S.2
ASSISTED GAIT
Metric
Walking
velocity (km/h)
Hip flexion
angle
Hip flexion
velocity
Exo assist
moment
Exo assist
power
NRMSE
2.0
0.267
0.247
0.210
0.294
3.0
0.241
0.204
0.158
0.290
4.0
0.227
0.187
0.154
0.311
5.0
0.242
0.173
0.111
0.289
R
2.0
0.896
0.645
0.916
0.328
3.0
0.922
0.775
0.962
0.754
4.0
0.887
0.856
0.932
0.507
5.0
0.867
0.927
0.969
0.737
NDTW
2.0
0.120
0.067
0.089
0.113
3.0
0.106
0.068
0.058
0.105
4.0
0.074
0.072
0.051
0.129
5.0
0.066
0.078
0.033
0.102
Table S.11: Similarity metrics between simulated and real kinematics and dynamics.
Data Type
rHEI
rassist
no rHEI
RMS Assist Moment
0.964
0.745
0.726
Mean Assist Power
0.462
-0.180
-0.082
Mean Resist Power
0.919
0.623
0.589
Table S.12: Correlation (r) between simulated and real human–exoskeleton interaction.
T
HYPERPARAMETERS
T.1
HUMAN CONTROLLER
Reward parameters
wgait
1.0
wenergy
0.35
warm
1.0
wHEI
0.1
σstep
1.581
σvel
3.162
σhead
4.0
σsway
0.816
σarm
1.0
λr
0.018
λv
0.0105
λω
0.045
δpelvis
10◦
δspine
3◦
δfoot
12◦
kenergy
0.2
kalive
0.1
PPO parameters for PDN
Batch size
8192
lr
5e-5
log σ
1.0
γ
0.99
λ
0.99
eclip
0.2
klcoeff
0.01
kltarget
0.01
MCN learning parameters
Nepoch
5
lr
1e-4
wreg
0.01
wIMR
0.1
T.2
EXOSKELETON OPTIMIZER
δh
1.0
λgrad
5e-2
λL1
5e-4
λL2
5e-4
Epoch
1e4
Hidden
[256, 256]
lrinit
0.1
lrend
5e-4
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
U
NOMENCLATURE
U.1
HUMAN CONTROLLER AND EXOSKELETON
τexo
Hip assistive torque generated by the exoskeleton controller.
κ
Gain scaling the magnitude of exoskeleton torque.
∆t
Time delay of the delayed-output feedback controller.
u(t)
Control signal encoding relative hip motion.
θr, θl
Low-pass filtered right and left hip joint angles.
s
Full simulation state.
sskeleton
State of the musculoskeletal skeleton (kinematics and dynamics).
smuscle
Muscle-related state (forces, bounds, and dynamic parameters).
sexo
Exoskeleton state, including recent assistive torques.
qd
PD target joint positions produced by PoseNet.
a
Muscle activations applied to the musculoskeletal model.
τ(a)
Joint torque resulting from muscle activations as computed by the simulation
model.
τPD
Output torque of the PD controller (before subtracting exoskeleton torque).
τMCN
Target joint torque fed into the MCN to compute muscle activations.
U.2
RL REWARD
rtotal
Total reinforcement learning reward for the PoseNet.
rgait
Gait tracking reward composed of step, velocity, head, and sway terms.
rstep
Reward encouraging target step length.
rvel
Reward encouraging target walking speed.
rhead
Reward encouraging stable head orientation and motion.
rsway
Reward penalizing abnormal body sway.
rarm
Upper-arm imitation reward encouraging natural arm posture.
renergy
Reward regularizing metabolic energy expenditure.
rHEI
Human–exoskeleton interaction reward based on resistance minimization.
h
Current foot position.
hdesired
Target foot position corresponding to the desired step length.
v
Average forward walking velocity of the character.
vdesired
Target forward walking velocity.
σstep, vel
Scale parameter for rstep, vel
θhead
Head orientation with respect to the progression and global up directions.
alin
Linear acceleration of the head.
aang
Angular acceleration of the head.
kalive
Baseline term preventing full suppression of the head reward.
λr, λv, λω
Thresholds for head angle, linear acceleration, and angular acceleration.
σhead
Scale parameter used in the head-stability reward.
qb
Orientation angle of body segment b.
¯qb
Reference body angle from normative gait data.
δb
Allowed deviation threshold for segment b.
B
Set of body segments considered in the sway reward.
rsway,b
Sway reward term for body segment b.
ˆqj
Reference joint angle of upper-arm joint j in the reference motion.
qj
Current joint angle of upper-arm joint j.
σarm
Scale parameter for arm imitation error.
Pk
Mechanical power applied by the exoskeleton on side k ∈{L, R}.
U.3
RL ACTION
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
∆ϕ
Phase increment controlling advancement or delay of the gait phase.
∆M
Residual pose displacement applied to the reference pose.
ϕt
Gait phase at time step t.
Mt
Target pose for the PD controller at time step t.
Mref
Reference gait motion from which residuals are applied.
⊕
Operator combining a reference pose with a residual displacement.
U.4
MCN LOSS AND INTRAMUSCULAR REGULARIZATION
LMCN
Total loss for training the muscle coordination network.
LIMR
Intramuscular regularization loss enforcing coherent line-muscle activations.
wreg
Weight for activation regularization in the MCN loss.
wIMR
Weight for the intramuscular regularizer term.
Ng
Number of anatomical muscle groups.
Gg
Index set of line muscles belonging to group g.
¯ag
Mean activation over all line muscles in group g.
U.5
METABOLIC ENERGY
MEE
Metabolic energy expenditure.
mi / ai
Mass / Activation associated with the i-th muscle.
α, β
Exponent parameters governing effort- and fatigue-like behavior in the MEE
model.
CoT
Metabolic cost of transport (energy per unit distance).
L
Step length in the PWS evaluation routine.
f
Step frequency in the PWS evaluation routine.
τcyc
Time interval corresponding to one gait cycle.
Benefit
Improvement in CoT due to assistance
U.6
EXOSKELETON OPTIMIZER
X
Simulation parameter space.
xi
Sampled parameter point from X.
B
Buffer of parameter–CoT pairs collected from simulation.
c
Exoskeleton control parameter vector.
c∗
Optimal exoskeleton control parameter identified by the optimizer.
ˆfθ(c)
Surrogate network predicting CoT from control parameters c.
Lsurrogate
Training loss for the surrogate network.
ˆy
Surrogate prediction of CoT.
y
Ground-truth CoT obtained from simulation.
Lδh
Huber loss.
∇xˆy
Gradient of surrogate output with respect to its input parameters.
λgrad
Coefficient for the gradient penalty term.
λL1, λL2
Coefficients for L1 and L2 regularization on network weights.
wi
Individual weight parameter of the surrogate network.
gn
Discrete gait parameter (e.g., walking speed) index n.
κn
Optimal exoskeleton gain corresponding to gait parameter gn.
∆tn
Optimal time delay corresponding to gait parameter gn.
λ1, λ2
Regularization weights in the final exoskeleton optimization objective.
M
Number of discrete gait parameter settings used in the optimization.
U.7
OTHER HYPERPARAMETERS
Batch size
Number of samples per PPO update batch.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
lr
Learning rate (PPO or MCN, depending on context).
log σ
Log standard deviation of the action distribution.
γ
Discount factor in PPO.
λ
GAE parameter for advantage estimation.
eclip
PPO clipping parameter.
klcoeff
KL penalty coefficient in PPO.
kltarget
Target KL divergence in PPO.
Nepoch
Number of epochs for MCN training.
wIMR
Weight of the IMR term in the MCN loss.
Epoch
Number of training epochs for the surrogate network.
Hidden
Hidden-layer dimensions of the surrogate network MLP.
lrinit/lrend
Initial / Final learning rate of the optimizer schedule.
33