--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ADAPTIVE LOGIT ADJUSTMENT FOR
DEBIASING MULTIMODAL LANGUAGE MODELS
Hoin Jung, Junyi Chai & Xiaoqian Wang ∗
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{jung414,chai28,joywang}@purdue.edu
ABSTRACT
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have
significantly advanced image-to-text generation tasks such as image captioning
and visual question answering (VQA). However, these models often exhibit biases,
including attribute misalignment between the generated text and the input image, or
the reinforcement of harmful stereotypes. Existing debiasing techniques primarily
focus on modifying representations at the encoder or decoder level, which can
degrade model performance and may be susceptible to bias reintroduction from
external sources. In this work, we propose Adaptive Logit Adjustment (ALA) for
Bias Alignment and Neutralization, a post-hoc debiasing method that operates
directly on logits during autoregressive text generation. Unlike prior approaches
that modify internal representations, ALA selectively adjusts token probabilities
to mitigate biases without distorting essential model outputs. Our approach lever-
ages external classifiers to measure bias misalignment between image and text,
applies gradient-based importance analysis to identify bias-inducing tokens, and
dynamically refines token probabilities to reduce undesired biases. We evaluate
ALA on image captioning and various VQA tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness
in mitigating bias while maintaining contextual accuracy. Notably, our approach
is applicable to various multimodal architectures in a model-agnostic manner, in-
cluding VLMs and LMMs, across different tasks that involve autoregressive text
generation. Our results show that logit-based debiasing offers a flexible and effi-
cient alternative to existing encoder- and embedding-centric approaches, providing
a more practical solution for building fairer multimodal AI systems. The code is
available on GitHub.
1
INTRODUCTION
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have made significant
advancements in bridging visual inputs and textual outputs, enabling applications such as captioning
and visual question answering. However, these models often exhibit societal bias in their text
generation, leading to inaccuracies and offensive outputs (Fraser & Kiritchenko, 2024; Sathe et al.,
2024). For instance, they might misalign attributes between the actual image and the generated
description due to learned biases, or produce toxic language toward certain group, as illustrated in
Figure 1. These issues pose critical challenges for developing fair and responsible AI systems.
To address bias in image-to-text models, various debiasing approaches have been proposed. Many
existing methods primarily focus on achieving fair representations. However, fine-tuning-based
approaches for fair representation (Girrbach et al., 2025) are computationally expensive, particularly
for LMMs. As post-hoc debiasing techniques, some methods mitigate bias by modifying the image
encoder (Seth et al., 2023) or text decoder (Jung et al., 2024) to remove biased signals from visual
and textual latent representations. However, such blinding approaches may degrade overall model
utility. Additionally, these methods are impractical when the model is used for tasks requiring
attribute evaluation, such as querying a visual question answering (VQA) model with questions,
∗Corresponding author.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 1:
Bias in VLMs and LMMs in image-to-text tasks. These models can exhibit bias by
generating descriptions that misalign with the sensitive attributes of the given image (e.g., gender
misclassification in (a)) or by reinforcing stereotypes in generated text (e.g., racial bias in (b)). Our
proposed ALA mitigates these issues by refining model outputs to be more neutral and unbiased
while preserving accuracy.
“What is the gender of the person in this image?” (Cho et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). Furthermore,
as multimodal models increasingly incorporate Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to access
external knowledge (Lin & Byrne, 2022), even debiased internal representations can be re-polluted
by biased or toxic information retrieved from external sources (Zhou et al., 2024).
Motivated by these limitations, we propose a post-hoc debiasing approach, Adaptive Logit Adjust-
ment (ALA) for Bias Alignment and Neutralization. Unlike encoder- or representation-centric
debiasing, ALA operates on the logits (i.e., token probabilities) during the text generation process.
By directly adjusting token-level probabilities, we can selectively suppress undesirable or harmful
words while preserving crucial context from the latent representations. This allows users to either
neutralize specific biases or align the generated text with desired external attributes (e.g., from an
image classifier), without altering the underlying representations. ALA can also mitigate biases
introduced by external sources such as RAG, making it suitable for a wide range of applications.
Our method differs from other post-hoc debiasing techniques, such as CLIP-clip (Wang et al., 2021),
DeAR (Seth et al., 2023), model steering (Ratzlaff et al., 2024), and SFID (Jung et al., 2024), which
modify representations at the embedding level. These embedding-based interventions risk distorting
critical information, potentially degrading model performance in pursuit of fairness, as demonstrated
in our empirical evaluations. In contrast, unlike prior works, ALA employs external classifiers to
provide a clear, quantifiable target for alignment, leveraging gradient-based importance analysis
(Wang & Wang, 2022; Hao et al., 2021; Janizek et al., 2021) to identify biased tokens, and adaptively
adjusting logits based on discrepancies between the detected and desired bias levels. Consequently,
ALA explicitly corrects misalignments or stereotypical biases while maintaining both model utility
and contextual accuracy. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method across four tasks:
an image captioning task with VLMs, two open-ended VQA tasks, and a VQA-as-judge task, each
evaluated on distinct datasets and question types using LMMs.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
BIAS IN IMAGE-TO-TEXT GENERATION
Image captioning and VQA involve generating textual descriptions for images. Prior studies (Fraser &
Kiritchenko, 2024; Sathe et al., 2024; Howard et al., 2024b;a; Girrbach et al., 2025) have highlighted
the presence of bias in such image-to-text tasks as detailed in Section 3. While these studies effectively
quantify biases in model outputs, most remain limited to observational analysis and do not propose
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
concrete debiasing strategies. Among the approaches that attempt to mitigate bias, fine-tuning
methods have been predominant.
2.2
DEBIASING VLMS AND LMMS
Fine-tuning-based debiasing has been explored for both image captioning (Hirota et al., 2023) and
VQA (Park et al., 2020; Howard et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2024; Girrbach et al., 2025). However,
fine-tuning is computationally expensive and impractical for LMMs.
To avoid retraining, post-hoc methods have been proposed. Model-editing techniques (Wang et al.,
2024) modify representations but rely on predefined anti-stereotypical knowledge. CLIP-clip (Wang
et al., 2021), DeAR (Seth et al., 2023), model steering (Ratzlaff et al., 2024), and SFID (Jung
et al., 2024) adjust frozen embeddings without altering the entire model. While these approaches
are effective in certain scenarios, they directly manipulate embeddings, which can distort essential
information and reduce overall utility.
While logit adjustment has been explored in methods like VDD (Zhang et al., 2024) to improve
VQA performance, its mechanism and goals differ significantly from our work. VDD operates by
subtracting a reference logit (derived from a meaningless or empty input) to cancel out the model’s
unconditional output biases, thereby reducing hallucinations. However, this technique was not
designed for targeted social bias mitigation in generative tasks and, as our experiments show, has
limited effectiveness for this purpose. In contrast, our approach introduces a dynamic adjustment that
directly steers logits based on the real-time, measured misalignment between image attributes and the
generated text, a mechanism specifically designed for debiasing.
3
PROBLEM DEFINITION
3.1
BIAS IN IMAGE CAPTIONING WITH VLMS
Image captioning generates descriptive text from an image using VLMs such as CLIP-CAP (Mokady
et al., 2021) and BLIP (Li et al., 2022). A key fairness concern arises when an attribute identified in
the generated caption does not align with that of the subject in the image (Hirota et al., 2023). For
instance, given an image of a female firefighter, a profession stereotypically associated with men, the
model might erroneously refer to the individual as “he,” despite clear visual evidence to the contrary.
This discrepancy suggests that VLMs can exhibit bias by associating certain professions or activities
more frequently with specific attributes. While this type of image-text mismatch can apply to any
attribute, we focus on gender bias as a representative case for this task.
Evaluation Metric. To quantify gender-related fairness issues, we evaluate the gender mismatch rate
by detecting pronouns in the generated captions defined in (Jung et al., 2024). Given an image index
k in the test set, the mismatch indicator function is defined as follows
Ik =
1
if (original gender) ̸= (detected gender)
0
if (original gender) = (detected gender)
or
(neutral detected gender)
where the misclassification rates for different gender groups are computed as MRM
=
1
|M|
P
k∈M Ik, MRF =
1
|F|
P
k∈F Ik, and MRO =
1
|O|
P
k∈O Ik, with M, F, and O de-
note male, female, and overall, respectively. Instead of relying solely on the overall misclas-
sification rate, we employ the Composite Misclassification Rate defined in (Jung et al., 2024),
MRC =
p
MR2
O + (MRF −MRM)2, which captures both the overall error and the discrepancy
between gender-specific error rates.
While debiasing the generated captions, we must also maintain their overall quality. To evaluate
caption quality, we adopt MaxMETEOR and MaxSPICE following (Jung et al., 2024). The details are
introduced in Appendix B.1. In evaluating image captioning models, a lower MRC indicates better
fairness, while higher MaxMETEOR and MaxSPICE scores reflect improved captioning performance.
3.2
BIAS IN VISUAL QUESTION ANSWERING WITH LMMS
Bias is not limited to task-specific models; it can also be prevalent in more general LMMs. To
quantify bias in LMMs, we consider two scenarios of VQA tasks with open-ended questions.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: Adaptive Logit Adjustment (ALA) for Bias Alignment first generates next text token
without modification. Then, it computes the target bias s ∈[−1, 1] from the frozen image represen-
tation and the bias score α(zt) ∈[−1, 1] from the generated text by utilizing attribute classifier for
image and text, respectively. If a discrepancy between α(zt) and s is detected, the predicted logit
vector is adjusted proportionally to the discrepancy. Importantly, only bias-related vocabularies are
modified, either emphasizing or suppressing their logits. The direction and strength of the adjustment
are precomputed as β ∈RV , derived via gradient-based importance analysis (i.e., Integrated Gradi-
ents (Sundararajan et al., 2017)), ensuring targeted and interpretable debiasing.
VQA-Task-1. First, similar to image captioning, LMMs can generate biased responses when de-
scribing a given image with an open-ended question: "Describe the photo in detail."
(Ratzlaff et al., 2024). The same fairness evaluation metric, MRC, is used for this task, meaning that
the generated text should contain pronouns that are either neutral or match the gender in the image.
VQA-Task-2.
Second, we consider a more diverse scenario beyond gender bias.
An
LMM might be biased to generate harmful or toxic keywords for certain attributes when
describing the image.
For this task, we consider gender, physical traits and race, us-
ing the following prompt:
"What are the five keywords that describe the
characteristics of people like the person in this image?" as suggested
in (Howard et al., 2024a). Ideally, the level of toxicity should be similar across attributes and their
intersectional combinations. We use the average toxicity level, as measured by an external classifier,
as our evaluation metric. The evaluation metric is defined as Dmean, while its details are introduced
in Appendix B.2. In our evaluation, we use VQA-Task-1 and VQA-Task-2 to measure fairness, and
introduce a third VQA task in Section 5.1 to assess the impact of our debiasing method on the model’s
core utility.
4
PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we introduce Adaptive Logit Adjustment for Bias Alignment (ALA-BA) and Neutral-
ization (ALA-N), a post-hoc logit manipulation approach designed to debias image-to-text generation
in both VLMs and LMMs.
Our approach operates by quantifying the attribute mismatch between the input image and the
generated text during the autoregressive process. At each generation step t, the model’s final layer
outputs a logit vector zt = (z1, . . . , zV ) ∈RV . To measure this bias, we leverage two pre-trained
classifiers. First, an image classifier, f image : Rd →[−1, 1], processes the input image x to produce
a sensitive-attribute signal, s = f image(x), which serves as the target bias. Second, a text classifier,
f text : Rd →[−1, 1], predicts the sensitive-attribute level in the generated text, from which we define
the text’s bias score as α(zt) = f text(zt).
Ideally, we want α(zt) ≈s, so that the model’s textual bias aligns with the image-based bias. A large
value of |α(zt) −s| therefore implies a significant misalignment between the image and the text.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4.1
ADAPTIVE LOGIT ADJUSTMENT (ALA)
Our goal is to push α(zt) closer to the target bias s. To achieve this, we consider a small update ∆zt
and use a first-order Taylor expansion to approximate the change in α,
α(zt + ∆zt) ≈α(zt) +
V
X
i=1
∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
∆zt
i.
(1)
By subtracting s from each side, we get
 α(zt + ∆zt) −s

≈
 α(zt) −s

+
V
X
i=1
∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
∆zt
i.
(2)
Since our objective is to reduce the absolute discrepancy |α(zt) −s|, a natural approach is to use
a gradient-descent-like update on zt. We adjust each logit zt
i proportionally to the gradient ∂α(zt)
∂zt
i ,
ensuring that α(zt) moves toward s in each step. Thus, we design,
∆zt
i = zt,′
i
−zt
i = −λ
 α(zt) −s
 ∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
,
(3)
where zt,′
i
is the adjusted logit, and λ > 0 is a hyperparameter controlling the adjustment strength.
Insight from Eq. 3:
Substituting Eq. 3 into Eq. 1, we obtain
∆α = α
 zt + ∆zt
−α(zt) ≈
V
X
i=1
∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
∆zt
i
=
V
X
i=1
∂α(zt)
∂zt
i

−λ (α(zt) −s) ∂α(zt)
∂zt
i

= −λ
 α(zt) −s

V
X
i=1

∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
2
.
(4)
This formulation ensures that if α(zt) > s, the update will decrease α(zt), and if α(zt) < s, the
update will increase α(zt), closing the gap. The magnitude of the update is controlled by the squared
gradient norm PV
i=1( ∂α(zt)
∂zt
i )2, ensuring a stronger adjustment when α(zt) deviates significantly from
s. This aligns α(zt) with s, ensuring that the model’s textual attribute moves toward the image-based
attribute or a neutralized target. The overall structure of the proposed ALA is illustrated in Figure 2.
4.2
BIASED TOKEN IDENTIFICATION
Because the partial derivatives ∂α(zt)
∂zt
i
include the decoding process (i.e., selecting arg maxi zt
i to
determine the next token), they are difficult to compute at each step. Instead, we approximate these
gradients with token-specific importance scores βi ≈∂α(zt)
∂zt
i , where β = (β1, · · · , βV ) ∈RV . To
identify tokens that significantly contribute to bias, we leverage gradient-based explanation techniques
(Wang & Wang, 2022; Hao et al., 2021; Janizek et al., 2021). Specifically, for each token i in the
vocabulary, we compute a bias-related score βi measuring its contribution to the predicted sensitive
attribute with the classifier f text. Specifically, we take average over the gradient of the classifier’s
output with respect to the token embedding ei (Sundararajan et al., 2017). Although computing βi at
every generation step is expensive, we can pre-compute a dictionary {βi : i = 1, . . . , V } and store
these values. The resulting fixed scores βi ∈[−1, 1], normalized for consistency, serve as indicators
of each token’s inherent bias. Then, we rewrite Eq. 3 as
zt,′
i
= zt
i −λ
 α(zt) −s

βi,
(5)
and use βi in the logit adjustment step to steer the logit distribution toward the desired bias alignment.
However, applying logit adjustment at every time step may be computationally expensive due to
the need for the text classifier f text to compute α(zt). Moreover, adjusting logits for tokens that are
unrelated to bias information is unnecessary. To address this, we propose a selective logit adjustment
strategy, where adjustment is applied only when the importance of the selected token it at time t is
sufficiently high, i.e., |βit| ≥τ. We select τ = 0.1 throughout the experiments based on analysis
depicted in Figure 3. The detailed process of ALA is introduced in Algorithm 1.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 3: Selection of the threshold (τ) for biased token identification. The normalized importance
score (β) is analyzed for each token to assess its contribution to gender bias. The results indicate that
setting |τ| = 0.1 is sufficient to effectively steer biased token mitigation through ALA.
4.3
ALA FOR NEUTRALIZATION
In ALA-BA, s ∈[−1, 1] represents the target bias, guiding text generation by minimizing the
discrepancy between α(zt) and s. However, users might prefer a neutralized output rather than one
with aligned bias. ALA can be adapted for this purpose by minimizing the absolute bias score |α(zt)|,
ensuring that sensitive attributes are neither emphasized nor suppressed.
To achieve this, we modify the logit adjustment strategy by setting the target bias s = 0 and ensuring
the update always reduces the magnitude of the bias score, |α(zt)|. This adjustment mitigates tokens
that contribute most to bias, regardless of whether they reflect positive or negative associations. As a
result, the presence of sensitive attributes in the generated text is effectively reduced.
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Logit Adjustment for Bias Alignment
Require: Input image x, VLM (or LMM) F with its image encoder G, Input prompt P, Pre-trained
classifiers: f image, f text, Token bias score vector β ∈RV , Maximum token length: max token,
Hyperparameter λ
Ensure: Debiased (or bias-aligned) text T
1: s ←f image(G(x))
// Target bias from image classifier
2: T ←[ ]
// Initialize output text as empty
3: for t ←1 to max token do
4:
zt ←F
 x, P, T

// Obtain logits for next token based on partial text
5:
it ←arg maxi zt
i
// Choose the next token using the original logits
6:
if |βit| ≥τ then
7:
α(zt) ←f text T ∪{ it}

// Measure bias in current partial text
8:
zt,′ ←zt −λ(α(zt) −s) β
// Adaptive Logit Adjustment
9:
i∗←arg maxi zt,′
// Choose the next token using the adjusted logits
10:
else
11:
i∗←it // If the next token is not significant for bias, skip the logit adjustment
12:
end if
13:
T ←T ∪{ i∗}
// Append new token to the text sequence
14: end for
4.4
INTERSECTIONAL DEBIASING
Real-world debiasing often requires addressing multiple protected attributes simultaneously (e.g.,
race and gender). A key advantage of ALA is its signal agnosticism; it can ingest debiasing signals
from diverse sources (e.g., neural classifiers and rule-based detectors) and aggregate them into a
single logit adjustment via an Intersectional Logit Processor. We formulate this by summing the
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
adjustments from independent sources. For instance, to simultaneously mitigate gender and racial
biases, the adjusted logit vector is computed as:
z′ = z −λgender(αgender −sgender)βgender −λrace(αrace −srace)βrace.
(6)
This formulation allows ALA to explicitly address complex, intersectional biases at inference time.
Further implementation details, along with comprehensive quantitative evaluations and qualitative
examples, are provided in Appendix O.
5
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
5.1
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Image Captioning. We exclude images that contain multiple individuals to avoid ambiguity in
gender identification. We evaluate two image captioning models, CLIP-CAP (Mokady et al., 2021)
and BLIP (Li et al., 2022) using the MS-COCO dataset (Chen et al., 2015), which contains 10,780
images, each with five reference captions.
VQA-Task-1. We utilize the FACET (Gustafson et al., 2023) dataset, a real-world dataset containing
gender/racial attributes, which makes it well suited for evaluating bias in LMMs. To ensure clarity in
the evaluation, we select images that contain only one person, obtaining 15,623 images. The same
fairness evaluation metric is adopted as in the image captioning task.
VQA-Task-2. We utilize the SocialCounterfactuals dataset (Howard et al., 2024b;a) to assess
stereotypical bias in LMMs. This dataset comprises balanced synthetic images representing various
intersectional attributes, including physical traits (skinny, obese, young, old, tattooed), gender
(female, male), and race (Asian, Black, Indian, Latino, Middle Eastern, White). From more than 170k
images, we select 5,200 by choosing 100 counterfactual sets for each intersectional bias combination
(physical-gender, physical-race, and race-gender) to ensure a balance across attributes.
VQA-Task-3 (Utility Preservation as a Judge). To measure how debiasing affects a model’s
core utility, we design a “judge” task. This experiment tests whether a model can still accurately
identify an attribute after debiasing—a scenario where methods that simply “blind” or remove bias-
related information would likely fail. We use the FACET dataset and prompt the model with the
following direct question: "What is the gender of the person in this image?
Choose either Male or Female as your response". The expectation is that the
model should correctly identify the attribute without refusal. To quantify any harm to this capability,
we define the “Worst-Case Accuracy Degradation” (DW CA) as:
DW CA =
min
G∈{Female, Male}(Acc(Md, G) −Acc(Mo, G)),
where Md is the debiased model, Mo is the original model, and a value closer to zero indicates better
utility preservation.
Summarization. For clarification, we provide a table summarizing the model, dataset, and prompt
used in each experiment in Table 2 in Appendix C.
5.2
APPLYING ALA FOR EACH TASK
The objective of each task differs. In image captioning and VQA-Task-1, both bias alignment (ALA-
BA) and neutralization (ALA-N) are acceptable goals. For VQA-Task-2, however, the primary goal
is to ensure non-toxicity across all attributes; we achieve this by setting the target bias to s = −1,
treating non-toxicity as a specific form of bias alignment. Finally, the VQA-Task-3 judge task requires
only bias alignment (ALA-BA), as the model must correctly identify the attribute in the image. For
each VQA task, we utilize LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024) and PaliGemma (Beyer et al., 2024), two
prominent and powerful LMMs.
Table 1 summarizes the different experimental settings of ALA for each task. To estimate the
confidence interval across all tasks, we apply bootstrapping with 1,000 resampling iterations. Further-
more, to verify that our approach scales to modern, instruction-tuned architectures, we extended our
evaluation to Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct Team (2025). Our results demonstrate that ALA effectively
mitigates bias even in models with strong instruction-following capabilities, where standard prompt
engineering fails. Detailed results and analysis are provided in Appendix L.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: ALA can be adapted to various scenarios by adjusting its configuration on target bias s,
token bias β, and bias score in text α(zt) = f text.
Configuration
ALA-BA
ALA-N
Image
Captioning
VQA
Task 1 & 3
Task 2
Target bias s
f image
f image
-1
0
Token bias
β
β
β
|β|
Bias score in text
α(zt)
α(zt)
α(zt)
|α(zt)|
5.3
PRETRAINING EXTERNAL CLASSIFIERS
Dataset: We utilize the FairFace (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021) and Bias-in-Bios (De-Arteaga et al.,
2019) datasets to pretrain f image and f text, respectively, to mitigate gender bias in VLMs and LMMs.
For toxicity debiasing, we use the Wikipedia Toxicity dataset (Thain et al., 2017). Using datasets for
pretraining that are distinct from those used in our evaluations (COCO, FACET, and SocialCounter-
factuals) demonstrates the transferability of our debiasing method.
Architecture: For f image, we employ a logistic regression on frozen representations extracted by the
target model’s image encoder, e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). For f text, we adopt a transformer-
based classifier (Vaswani et al., 2017) to predict gender using the Bias-in-Bios dataset or toxicity
using the Wikipedia Toxicity dataset. The f text classifier serves two purposes: (1) identifying biased
tokens β, as described in Sec. 4.2, and (2) computing the bias score α(zt) in the generated text, as
discussed in Sec. 4.1.
5.4
COMPARISON METHODS
We compare ALA against several debiasing methods, including CLIP-clip (Wang et al., 2021),
DeAR (Seth et al., 2023), and SFID (Jung et al., 2024), which primarily aim to mitigate bias in the
representation space. We also implement VDD (Zhang et al., 2024), which applies logit adjustment
to improve VQA performance. Moreover, we compare against a prompt engineering baseline, which
uses an external classifier to add attribute-specific instructions to the prompt. Further details for each
comparison are provided in Appendix D.
6
RESULT ANALYSIS
6.1
VISUAL ANALYSIS OF FAIRNESS-UTILITY TRADE-OFFS
We visualize the trade-off between fairness and utility in Figure 4. Figure 4(a) demonstrates this
trade-off for image captioning (fairness vs. caption quality), while Figure 4(b) and (c) show the
results for VQA-Task-1 and VQA-Task-2, respectively. For these VQA plots, the y-axis uses the
“Worst-Case Accuracy Degradation” metric from VQA-Task-3 to measure the impact on utility.
In these plots, the ideal method is located in the top-left quadrant, representing high fairness (a lower
x-axis value) and minimal performance degradation (a higher y-axis value). As shown across all
subfigures, our proposed methods, ALA-BA and ALA-N, are positioned near the top of the plot.
This visually confirms that ALA preserves accuracy across gender subgroups. In contrast, other
methods such as DeAR and CLIP-clip exhibit significant negative y-axis values, indicating that
their fairness improvements come at the cost of performance degradation for at least one subgroup.
Furthermore, ALA achieves these results while securing top-tier fairness scores, demonstrating a
superior balance compared to competing approaches. Collectively, these visualizations underscore
a primary contribution of our work: across different models, tasks, and fairness metrics, ALA
consistently provides an effective solution that mitigates bias while preserving the model’s essential
utility (top-left). More detailed quantitative results are provided in Tables 5, 6, 7, and 8 in Appendix I.
Applicability to Reasoning Tasks. Our experiments on image captioning and VQA demonstrate
that ALA effectively reduces gender and stereotypical biases while preserving model performance.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that ALA’s utility extends beyond generative tasks to discriminative
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LLaVA
PaliGemma
Fairness (𝑀𝑅!)
Fairness (𝑀𝑅!)
Worst-case Acc. Degradation (min
" ∆𝐴𝑐𝑐")
▲(a) Fairness-Utility Trade-off (Image Captioning)
▲(b) Fairness-Utility Trade-off (VQA-Task-1 vs VQA-Task-3) 
LLaVA
PaliGemma
Worst-case Acc. Degradation (min
" ∆𝐴𝑐𝑐")
Fairness (𝐷#$%&)
Fairness (𝐷#$%&)
▲(c) Fairness-Utility Trade-off (VQA-Task-2 vs VQA-Task-3) 
Fairness (𝑀𝑅!)
Fairness (𝑀𝑅!)
CLIP-CAP
BLIP
MaxMETEOR
Figure 4: The fairness-utility trade-off of various debiasing methods across different models and
tasks. (a) plots caption quality (MaxMETEOR) against gender fairness (MRC) for image captioning
models. (b) and (c) plot utility preservation (DW CA) against fairness metrics (MRC for gender and
Dmean for stereotypes, respectively) for VQA tasks with LMMs.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
"Describe the photo in detail.”
“What are the five keywords that describe the
characteristics of people like the person in this image?”
Baseline ...a man paddling on a blue... He...
CLIP-clip ...a woman wearing a yellow... She...
DeAR
...a man paddling on a blue... He...
SFID
...a man paddling on a blue... He...
VDD
...a bouquet of flowers in his hands...
Prompt
...a man wearing a yellow... He...
ALA-BA
...a woman wearing a yellow... She...
ALA-N
...a person paddling on a blue... The person...
Figure 5: Qualitative examples demonstrating how ALA mitigates both attribute misalignment and
stereotypical biases. Biased terms are highlighted in red, aligned corrections in blue, and neutralized
outputs in green. In the left subfigure, ALA-BA adjusts output to align with the subject’s attributes
(e.g., changing “woman” to “man”), while ALA-N generates a neutral description (e.g., “a person”).
The right subfigure illustrates the reduction of stereotypical bias, where ALA replaces negative
keywords like “Dirty” with more objective descriptions.
reasoning tasks, such as occupation recognition, as detailed in Appendix M. It achieves the best or
near-best fairness results across multiple tasks.
6.2
ABLATION STUDY AND LIMITATIONS
In ALA, the strength of logit adjustment is controlled by the hyperparameter λ. Our ablation study,
detailed in Appendix F, shows that even a small adjustment (e.g., λ = 0.1) improves fairness, while
λ = 2 provides the best trade-off between utility and fairness. However, excessively large values of λ
can degrade both performance and fairness, as shown in Figure 9 in the appendix.
Our method has two primary limitations. First, the effectiveness of ALA is dependent on the
performance of the external attribute classifiers. We provide a theoretical analysis of this dependency
in Appendix G. Second, the use of these classifiers introduces a minor computational overhead.
However, this overhead is minimal: ALA incurs only a 3.1% increase in GPU utilization and a
1.2% increase in inference time. These costs are comparable to those of competing methods like
CLIP-clip, SFID, and DeAR, remaining approximately twice as fast as VDD, which has a notably
higher inference time. Furthermore, ALA’s minimal overhead offers a vast efficiency advantage over
model steering methods, which require a prohibitive full backward pass through the massive LMM
decoder at every inference step. A more detailed analysis of these computational costs is provided in
Appendix H.
7
CONCLUSION
We introduce Adaptive Logit Adjustment (ALA), a post-hoc debiasing method that refines token
probabilities during autoregressive text generation. Unlike existing approaches that modify encoder
or decoder representations, ALA directly adjusts logits to mitigate biases without distorting essential
model outputs. ALA leverages external classifiers to detect bias misalignment between images and
text, applies gradient-based importance analysis to identify biased tokens, and dynamically adjusts
token probabilities to align the attributes of the input image and generated text. This ensures targeted
intervention without requiring model retraining.
Our experiments on image captioning and VQA demonstrate that ALA effectively reduces gender
and stereotypical biases while preserving model performance. It achieves the best or near-best
fairness results across multiple tasks, outperforming existing debiasing methods without degrading
model utility. By reducing harmful biases without sacrificing performance, ALA provides a practical
and efficient solution for developing fairer and more responsible multimodal AI systems, thereby
promoting more equitable and trustworthy deployment of these models in real-world applications.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ETHICS STATEMENT
This work is motivated by the goal of creating fairer and more responsible AI systems by mitigating
biases in multimodal models. Our research exclusively uses publicly available, established benchmark
datasets for experiments and for training the external classifiers, as detailed in Sections 5.1 and 5.3. No
new data was collected, and no human subjects were involved. A key component of our methodology
is the use of external attribute classifiers to guide the debiasing process. Recognizing that the
performance of these classifiers is an important factor, we provide a detailed analysis in Appendix G
which validates their accuracy and suitability for this framework. By proposing a method to reduce
attribute misalignment and harmful stereotypes, we aim to contribute positively to the development
of more equitable AI technology.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We are committed to ensuring the reproducibility of our research. The complete methodology
for our proposed Adaptive Logit Adjustment (ALA) is detailed in Section 4, with a step-by-step
implementation guide provided in Algorithm 1. All experimental setups, including the models,
datasets, and prompts for each of the four tasks, are described in Section 5.1 and summarized in
Table 2 (Appendix C). The training details for the external classifiers are provided in Section 5.3. The
fairness and quality metrics used for evaluation are formally defined in Section 3.1 and Appendix B.
To facilitate full verification of our results, our source code is included in the supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by the EMBRIO Institute, contract #2120200, a National Science
Foundation (NSF) Biology Integration Institute, Purdue’s Elmore ECE Emerging Frontiers Center,
and NSF IIS #2146091, IIS #2345235.
REFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. Spice: Semantic propositional
image caption evaluation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Ams-
terdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part V 14, pp. 382–398. Springer,
2016.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic
evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summarization, pp. 65–72, 2005.
Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, Andr´e Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel Salz,
Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschannen, Emanuele Bugliarello, Thomas
Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Skanda Koppula, Fangyu Liu, Adam Grycner, Alexey Gritsenko,
Neil Houlsby, Manoj Kumar, Keran Rong, Julian Eisenschlos, Rishabh Kabra, Matthias Bauer,
Matko Boˇsnjak, Xi Chen, Matthias Minderer, Paul Voigtlaender, Ioana Bica, Ivana Balazevic, Joan
Puigcerver, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Olivier Henaff, Xi Xiong, Radu Soricut, Jeremiah Harmsen, and
Xiaohua Zhai. PaliGemma: A versatile 3B VLM for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07726,
2024.
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45:5–32, 2001.
Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Doll´ar, and
C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco captions: Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.00325, 2015.
Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. Dall-eval: Probing the reasoning skills and social biases
of text-to-image generation models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 3043–3054, 2023.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wallach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Bias in bios: A
case study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes setting. In proceedings of the Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 120–128, 2019.
Kathleen Fraser and Svetlana Kiritchenko. Examining gender and racial bias in large vision–language
models using a novel dataset of parallel images. In Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver (eds.),
Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 690–713, St. Julian’s, Malta, March 2024. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.eacl-long.
41/.
Leander Girrbach, Yiran Huang, Stephan Alaniz, Trevor Darrell, and Zeynep Akata. Revealing and
reducing gender biases in vision and language assistants (VLAs). In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=oStNAMWELS.
Laura Gustafson, Chloe Rolland, Nikhila Ravi, Quentin Duval, Aaron Adcock, Cheng-Yang Fu,
Melissa Hall, and Candace Ross. Facet: Fairness in computer vision evaluation benchmark. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 20370–20382,
2023.
Yaru Hao, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Ke Xu. Self-attention attribution: Interpreting information
interactions inside transformer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 35, pp. 12963–12971, 2021.
Yusuke Hirota, Yuta Nakashima, and Noa Garcia. Model-agnostic gender debiased image captioning.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
15191–15200, 2023.
Phillip Howard, Anahita Bhiwandiwalla, Kathleen C Fraser, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. Uncovering
bias in large vision-language models with counterfactuals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00166,
2024a.
Phillip Howard, Avinash Madasu, Tiep Le, Gustavo Lujan Moreno, Anahita Bhiwandiwalla, and
Vasudev Lal. Socialcounterfactuals: Probing and mitigating intersectional social biases in vision-
language models with counterfactual examples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11975–11985, 2024b.
Joseph D Janizek, Pascal Sturmfels, and Su-In Lee. Explaining explanations: Axiomatic feature
interactions for deep networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(104):1–54, 2021.
Hoin
Jung,
Taeuk
Jang,
and
Xiaoqian
Wang.
A
unified
debiasing
approach
for
vision-language
models
across
modalities
and
tasks.
In
Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems,
volume
37,
pp.
21034–21058,
2024.
URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/
254404d551f6ce17bb7407b4d6b3c87b-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Kimmo Karkkainen and Jungseock Joo. Fairface: Face attribute dataset for balanced race, gender,
and age for bias measurement and mitigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference
on applications of computer vision, pp. 1548–1558, 2021.
Seongyun Lee, Seungone Kim, Sue Hyun Park, Geewook Kim, and Minjoon Seo. Prometheusvision:
Vision-language model as a judge for fine-grained evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06591,
2024.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Weizhe Lin and Bill Byrne. Retrieval augmented visual question answering with outside knowledge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03809, 2022.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Sungho Park, Sunhee Hwang, Jongkwang Hong, and Hyeran Byun. Fair-vqa: Fairness-aware visual
question answering through sensitive attribute prediction. IEEE Access, 8:215091–215099, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Neale Ratzlaff, Matthew Lyle Olson, Musashi Hinck, Estelle Aflalo, Shao-Yen Tseng, Vasudev Lal,
and Phillip Howard. Debias your large multi-modal model at test-time with non-contrastive visual
attribute steering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12590, 2024.
Ashutosh Sathe, Prachi Jain, and Sunayana Sitaram. A unified framework and dataset for as-
sessing societal bias in vision-language models. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-
Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024,
pp. 1208–1249, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.66. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
findings-emnlp.66/.
Ashish Seth, Mayur Hemani, and Chirag Agarwal. Dear: Debiasing vision-language models with
additive residuals. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 6820–6829, 2023.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Qwen Team. Qwen2.5-vl, January 2025. URL https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen2.
5-vl/.
Nithum Thain, Lucas Dixon, and Ellery Wulczyn. Wikipedia Talk Labels: Toxicity. 2 2017. doi:
10.6084/m9.figshare.4563973.v2. URL https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/
Wikipedia_Talk_Labels_Toxicity/4563973.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
Jialu Wang, Yang Liu, and Xin Eric Wang. Are gender-neutral queries really gender-neutral?
mitigating gender bias in image search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05433, 2021.
Yipei Wang and Xiaoqian Wang.
“why not other classes?”: Towards class-contrastive back-
propagation explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9085–9097,
2022.
Zecheng Wang, Xinye Li, Zhanyue Qin, Chunshan Li, Zhiying Tu, Dianhui Chu, and Dianbo Sui.
Can we debiase multimodal large language models via model editing? In ACM Multimedia 2024,
2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ybqqGTWuhj.
Zhibo Wang, Xiaowei Dong, Henry Xue, Zhifei Zhang, Weifeng Chiu, Tao Wei, and Kui Ren.
Fairness-aware adversarial perturbation towards bias mitigation for deployed deep models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
10379–10388, 2022.
Yunfan Yang, Chaoquan Jiang, Zhiyu Lin, Jinlin Xiao, Jiaming Zhang, and Jitao Sang. Debiasing
vison-language models with text-only training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09365, 2024.
Yi-Fan Zhang, Weichen Yu, Qingsong Wen, Xue Wang, Zhang Zhang, Liang Wang, Rong Jin, and
Tieniu Tan. Debiasing large visual language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05262, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yujia Zhou, Yan Liu, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Hongjin Qian, Zheng Liu, Chaozhuo Li, Zhicheng Dou,
Tsung-Yi Ho, and Philip S Yu. Trustworthiness in retrieval-augmented generation systems: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10102, 2024.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
MORE QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Additional qualitative examples are provided in Figure 6, 7, and 8. Biased terms are highlighted in
red, aligned corrections in blue, and neutralized outputs in green. The examples show that ALA-BA
consistently mitigate the bias-misalignment issue between image and caption, while the ALA-N
generates neutralized texts.
Baseline A man cutting up a piece of meat on a table.
CLIP-clip A woman cutting up a piece of meat...
DeAR
A man cutting up a piece of meat on a table.
SFID
A woman in a white shirt cutting up a cake.
VDD
A woman cutting up carrots on a white plate.
ALA-BA
A woman cutting up a piece of meat on a table.
ALA-N
A woman cutting up a piece of meat on a table.
Baseline A baby holding a stuffed animal in his arms.
CLIP-clip A baby holding a stuffed animal in his hands.
DeAR
A baby holding a stuffed animal in his arms.
SFID
A baby holding a teddy bear in his arms.
VDD
A baby holding a stuffed animal in his arms.
ALA-BA
A baby holding a stuffed animal in her arms.
ALA-N
A baby holding a stuffed animal in it's arms.
CLIP-CAP, Attribute: Female
CLIP-CAP, Attribute: Female
Baseline a woman sitting on the sidewalk talking on her cell
CLIP-clip a person sitting on a sidewalk
DeAR
a man sitting on the sidewalk talking on a cell
SFID
a person on a cell phone
VDD
a woman sitting on the sidewalk talking on her cell
ALA-BA
a man sitting on the sidewalk talking on his cell
ALA-N
a person sitting on the sidewalk talking on a cell
BLIP, Attribute: Male
Baseline a woman sitting on a bench looking at her phone
CLIP-clip a woman sitting on a bench looking at her phone
DeAR
a man sitting on a bench looking at his phone
SFID
a person on a cell phone
VDD
a woman sitting on a bench looking at her phone
ALA-BA
a man sitting on a bench with a cell in his hand
ALA-N
a person sitting on a bench looking at a cell
BLIP, Attribute: Male
Figure 6: Additional qualitative examples demonstrating ALA’s effectiveness on image captioning
models, CLIP-CAP and BLIP.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
LLaVA-1.5-7B, Attribute: Female
LLaVA-1.5-7B, Attribute: Female
Figure 7: Additional qualitative examples demonstrating ALA’s effectiveness on LLaVA-1.5-7B
model.
B
EVALUATION METRIC
B.1
EVALUATION METRIC FOR IMAGE CAPTIONING
For evaluating the caption quality, we adopt METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) and SPICE (Ander-
son et al., 2016). METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) evaluates the trade-off between precision and
recall of n-grams in generated captions while accounting for synonym matches. Let P and R denote
the precision and recall of matches between the generated caption and the ground truth, considering
exact, synonym, and paraphrase matches. METEOR is computed as:
METEOR = Fmean · (1 −Pen)
where
Fmean = 10 · P · R
R + 9 · P
represents a harmonic mean, and the penalty term is defined as:
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Baseline In this image we can see a person standing on the ground and holding a 
bunch of grass in his hand. In the background we can see a house, trees, 
tower and the sky.
CLIP-clip In this image, I can see a person is standing on the ground. I can see a few 
plants, a few trees, a house, a pole, a few people, a few clouds...
DeAR
In this image we can see a person wearing a hat and holding a bunch of 
grass in his hand. In the background, we can see a house, trees, a tower 
and the sky.
SFID
In this image I can see a person wearing blue color dress and hat is 
standing on the ground. I can see few dry grass, few trees, few buildings, 
few poles and the sky is in blue and white color.
VDD
In this image we can see a person standing and holding some objects in his 
hands. In the background we can see houses, trees, tower and sky with 
clouds.
Prompt
In this image we can see a person wearing a hat and holding a bunch of 
grass in her hand. In the background, we can see a house, trees, a tower 
and the sky.
ALA-BA
In this image we can see a person standing on the ground and holding a 
bunch of grass in her hand. In the background we can see a house, trees, 
tower and the sky.
ALA-N
In this image we can see a person standing on the ground and holding a 
bunch of grass in the hands. In the background, we can see a house, trees, 
a tower and the sky.
PaliGemma, Attribute: Female
PaliGemma, Attribute: Female
Figure 8: Additional qualitative examples demonstrating ALA’s effectiveness on PaliGemma model.
Pen = 0.5 ×
 number of chunks
number of matches
3
A chunk refers to a sequence of consecutive words in the generated caption that appear in the
reference.
SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016), on the other hand, assesses the semantic quality of captions by
comparing sets of propositional semantic tuples extracted from both the candidate and reference
captions. It is computed as the F1 score of precision and recall between these tuples, providing a
measure of semantic alignment.
Following (Jung et al., 2024), the quality evaluation considers both the original ground-truth caption
and a neutral alternative,
MaxMETEOR = max(METEOR(Ttruth, Tcaption), METEOR(Tneutral, Tcaption)),
MaxSPICE = max(SPICE(Ttruth, Tcaption), SPICE(Tneutral, Tcaption)).
B.2
EVALUATION METRIC FOR VQA-TASK-2
For evaluation, we use a toxicity classifier f text, trained on the Wikipedia Toxicity dataset (Thain
et al., 2017), to score each of the five keywords generated for a given image i. The image’s overall
toxicity is the average of these five keyword scores.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
We then compute the mean toxicity for each specific attribute a within a broader category G (e.g.,
physical traits, gender, or race) as follows:
toxicG
a =
1
|Ia|
X
i∈Ia
meank∈{1,...,5}toxici,k,
where Ia is the set of images associated with attribute a. To measure the fairness disparity within a
category, we calculate DG
max, which is the maximum absolute difference in mean toxicity between
any two attributes in that category:
DG
max = max
a,b∈G
toxicG
a −toxicG
b
 .
Finally, to create a single, comprehensive fairness score across all categories, we define Dmean as the
average of these maximum disparities:
Dmean = 1
|G|
X
G∈G
DG
max,
where G = {physical traits, gender, race} is the set of all attribute categories considered. A lower
Dmean indicates greater fairness, as it signifies smaller toxicity gaps across all attributes.
C
SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
The details of experimental settings are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Experimental Setting Summary
Task
Image Captioning
VQA-Task-1
VQA-Task-2
VQA-Task-3
Dataset
COCO-Caption
FACET
SocialCounterfactuals
FACET
Model
CLIP-CAP, BLIP
LLaVA-1.5-7B
PaliGemma
LLaVA-1.5-7B
PaliGemma
LLaVA-1.5-7B
PaliGemma
Target Bias
Gender
Gender
Gender, Physical, Race
-
Prompt
-
Describe the photo in detail
What are the five
keywords that describe
the characteristics of
people like the
person in this image?
What is the gender of
the person in this image?
Fairness
Evaluation Metric
Composite Misclassification Rate
(MRC)
Maximum Disparity
(Dmean)
Accuracy &
Worst-Case
Accuracy Degradation
(DW CA)
D
DETAILS FOR COMPARISON METHOD
DeAR employs adversarial training by optimizing an adaptor network on the encoder’s representations
to deceive a sensitive attribute classifier, thereby eliminating bias-related information. We strictly
follow the original architecture and hyperparameter settings described in the paper to reimplement
DeAR.
CLIP-clip and SFID, on the other hand, focus on pruning biased features in the representation space.
SFID can be applied to the encoder, decoder, or both by identifying bias-related features at each
component and masking them. We report the best performance achieved by SFID while varying
its key hyperparameter, the number of imputed features. As a special case, we adopt SFID as a
bias-alignment baseline for comparison for VQA-Task-3, denoted SFID-BA. Further details are
provided in the Appendix E. Although CLIP-clip was initially proposed to remove bias from the
encoder’s embeddings, (Jung et al., 2024) suggests that CLIP-clip can be extended to the decoder
as well like SFID. CLIP-clip mitigates bias by removing specific features from the representation
space, effectively reducing its dimensionality. However, this direct feature removal is incompatible
with encoder-decoder architectures, as it alters the expected representation size. To address this
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
issue, we adapt CLIP-clip for image-to-text tasks using a zero-pruning strategy, which preserves the
dimensionality while removing the biased components.
In contrast, VDD (Zhang et al., 2024) was originally designed to mitigate hallucination by adjusting
the output logits through subtraction of a reference logit derived from an empty or meaningless image.
We implement VDD and include it for all evaluation scenarios.
The prompt engineering strategy relies on the external classifier, which is used in ALA. In VQA-
Task-1, in front of the input prompt, we put an instruction "The gender of the person in
the image is {PREDICTED GENDER}". to guide the generated text to align with the desired
gender.
In the SocialCounterfactuals dataset for VQA-Task-2, intersectional bias arises from a combination
of three categories: physical appearance, race, and gender. While comparable debiasing methods can
address specific types of bias, CLIP-clip and SFID are primarily effective in mitigating bias within a
single category. However, when multiple attributes interact to create intersectional bias in the test set,
only DeAR is capable of addressing it. The prompt engineering method simply use an instruction,
"Do not include toxicity in the generated text." To evaluate their debiasing
performance, we report results where CLIP-clip and SFID are applied separately to mitigate bias
in race and gender, the only attributes included in the FairFace debiasing training set, as shown in
Table 7. In contrast, our method explicitly addresses this issue across different bias types by setting
the target bias in stereotypical bias as s = −1, non-toxicity, as described in Table 1.
On the other hand, model steering (Ratzlaff et al., 2024) is not included in comparison as it requires
computing the gradient of the LMM w.r.t the input image, which exceeds our available computational
resources.
E
BIAS ALIGNMENT WITH SFID (JUNG ET AL., 2024)
Selective Feature Imputation for Debiasing (SFID) (Jung et al., 2024) is designed to obscure bias-
related information in the representation space. Specifically, it determines feature importance using
a Random Forest classifier (Breiman, 2001) trained to predict sensitive attributes. It then imputes
values in the most important features with those of the mean of low-confidence samples from the
validation dataset, ensuring that all features resemble ambiguous (low-confidence) samples.
However, this method can be applied in a different direction. Instead of obscuring important features,
they can be reinforced for certain demographic groups when a clear attribute signal is present, by
leveraging high-confidence samples. We adopt this strategy for the VQA-Task-3 task and report the
results of SFID-BA (Bias Alignment) in Table 8.
F
ABLATION STUDY
In ALA, the strength of logit adjustment is controlled by the hyperparameter λ. To analyze its impact,
we conduct ablation studies by varying λ and evaluating its effect on both performance and fairness
in image-to-text tasks.
For VLMs, we assess the effect of λ using CLIP-CAP for both Bias Alignment and Neutralization,
as shown in Figure 9 (a). The results indicate that while excessively large λ can degrade both
performance and fairness, an appropriately chosen λ, such as λ = 2, improves fairness without
sacrificing performance. Notably, even a small adjustment, such as λ = 0.1, already leads to
noticeable fairness improvements compared to the baseline. This demonstrates that ALA can
effectively mitigate bias with minimal intervention, making it adaptable to scenarios with strict
performance constraints.
For LMMs, we conduct a similar ablation study using the VQA task on the FACET dataset with
LLaVA. Figure 9 (b) illustrates how the fairness metric MRC for the open-ended description task,
VQA-Task-1, varies with different values of λ for each model. Utility is measured separately using
a different task, VQA-Task-3. Similar to the image captioning results in VLMs, fairness improves
with moderate values of λ, such as 2, while excessively large values degrade both fairness and utility.
This suggests that properly calibrated logit adjustment can provide a balanced approach to fairness,
preserving model performance while mitigating bias across different tasks and architectures.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Impact of 𝜆on ALA with VLMs
(b) Impact of 𝜆on ALA with LMMs
Figure 9: Impact of logit adjustment strength (λ) on VLMs for image captioning (CLIP-CAP) and
LMMs for VQA tasks (LLaVA). The orange curves represent model performance (higher is better):
MaxMETEOR score for image captioning and overall accuracy for VQA-as-judge. The blue curves
denote fairness, MRC (lower is better). Moderate values of λ, such as λ = 2, improve fairness
without degrading performance. Both Bias Alignment (left) and Neutralization (right) exhibit a
similar trend, though Neutralization achieves slightly better fairness.
G
CLASSIFIER PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
The use of an external classifier to guide debiasing is a common strategy in post-hoc methods (Wang
et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2024). A valid consideration for any such framework, including ours, is its
reliance on the performance of this external classifier. Therefore, we conduct an analysis to ensure
the classifiers used in our framework are sufficiently accurate and robust.
We train simple logistic regression classifiers on top of frozen image embeddings from our target
models (LLaVA-1.5 and PaliGemma) using the FairFace dataset. This dataset is ideal for isolating
demographic attributes, as it contains only facial images and minimizes confounding variables like
background scenery or clothing.
As shown in Table 3, our classifiers achieve high accuracy (over 93%). More importantly, we analyzed
the nature of their errors. The results show that a high proportion (over 78%) of misclassified samples
were those the classifier deemed ambiguous (i.e., its prediction score |s| was close to zero). This is
a crucial finding; it indicates that the classifier’s failures occur on genuinely difficult cases, not by
making confident mistakes on clear ones. This behavior makes it highly suitable for our framework,
as low-confidence scores from the classifier naturally result in smaller, more conservative logit
adjustments, preventing overcorrection based on an uncertain signal and resulting in neutralization
effect.
Finally, our framework is designed with an inherent safeguard against classifier error. The ALA-N
(Neutralization) variant mitigates this reliance by setting the target bias to a neutral state (s = 0).
This approach focuses on dampening any strong bias signal rather than aligning to a specific (and
potentially misclassified) attribute, making it exceptionally robust to imperfect classifier predictions.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3: Performance of gender attribute classifiers trained on frozen image embeddings from LLaVA
and PaliGemma using the FairFace dataset. High accuracy and a large proportion of ambiguity in
errors support their robustness for our framework.
Frozen Encoder
Accuracy
Portion Ambiguous in Misclassified
LLaVA-1.5-7B
96.37%
78.39%
PaliGemma
93.23%
83.02%
H
COMPUTATIONAL COST ANALYSIS
As we adopt external image and text classifiers, we carefully examine the additional computational
cost. Table 4 shows only a slight increase in RAM and GPU usage, as the external classifiers remain
lightweight—a single-layer classifier for image inputs and a two-block transformer for text inputs.
Notably, the increases are comparable across all comparison methods. However, VDD exhibits a
substantially slower inference time, with a 101.5% increase, as it requires performing inference twice
for each input, while our method incurs only a 1.2% increase.
Table 4: Resource consumption comparison of different methods.
Method
CPU Memory (MB)
RAM Usage (MB)
GPU Memory (MB)
Inference Time (s)
Value
%
Value
%
Value
%
Value
%
Baseline
1368.48
-
69578.89
-
13481.79
-
1.5621
-
CLIP-clip
1630.69
19.2
69821.79
0.3
13873.67
2.9
1.5639
0.1
SFID
1634.55
19.4
69755.95
0.3
13873.67
2.9
1.5739
0.8
DeAR
1406.82
2.8
69593.04
0.0
13882.86
3.0
1.5767
0.9
VDD
1426.94
4.3
70022.26
0.6
13876.67
2.9
3.1472
101.5
Ours (ALA)
1615.74
18.1
70137.92
0.8
13894.22
3.1
1.5815
1.2
I
DETAILED EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Tables 5, 6, 7, and 8 demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, ALA-BA (Bias Alignment)
and ALA-N (Neutralization). Specifically, ALA achieves the best or second-best fairness while
minimizing accuracy loss, highlighting the minimal trade-off between utility and fairness. In image
captioning (Table 5), ALA demonstrates strong fairness while maintaining caption quality. In the
VQA open-ended question tasks (Tables 6, 7), ALA consistently achieves top fairness results while
preserving accuracy in the VQA-as-judge task (Table 8), whereas representation-based debiasing
approaches often degrade utility.
While these tables provide a granular breakdown of performance on each task, the fairness-utility
trade-off can be more intuitively understood through visual analysis. For a comprehensive summary
and a direct comparison of this trade-off across all methods, we refer the reader to Figure 4 and
discussion in Section 6.1.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 5: Experimental results for image captioning on COCO-caption dataset. Bold indicates the best
result for each baseline, while underline denotes the second and third-best result.
Image Captioning
Caption Quality
Misclassification Rate
Max
METEOR(↑)
Max
SPICE (↑)
|Male-Female|(↓)
 |MRM −MRF|

Overall (↓)
 MRO

Composite (↓)
 MRC

CLIP-CAP
Baseline
34.51±0.20
25.38±0.18
2.08±0.72
2.00±0.28
2.91±0.59
CLIP-clip
31.95±0.20
23.93±0.16
0.37±0.36
2.26±0.31
2.30±0.32
SFID
32.11±0.17
24.03±0.18
1.41±0.64
2.25±0.26
2.70±0.44
DeAR
34.49±0.21
25.35±0.17
2.87±0.74
2.06±0.29
3.52±0.66
VDD
33.88±0.22
24.77±0.17
1.65±0.75
2.14±0.24
2.70±0.54
ALA-BA
34.37±0.19
25.27±0.17
1.19±0.64
1.97±0.27
2.34±0.43
ALA-N
34.47±0.21
25.35±0.18
1.34±0.70
1.99±0.28
2.42±0.44
BLIP
Baseline
25.84±0.13
18.58±0.13
2.11±0.62
1.38±0.21
2.52±0.60
CLIP-cli
25.83±0.13
18.50±0.11
2.73±0.63
1.31±0.20
3.04±0.63
SFID
24.11±0.16
18.13±0.13
1.45±0.47
0.77±0.16
1.65±0.47
DeAR
25.80±0.14
18.41±0.12
8.09±0.97
2.62±0.31
8.51±1.00
VDD
25.01±0.13
18.03±0.13
1.70±0.50
1.15±0.19
2.04±0.48
ALA-BA
25.57±0.13
18.40±0.13
1.86±0.53
1.37±0.22
2.30±0.51
ALA-N
25.56±0.13
18.42±0.13
1.39±0.47
0.91±0.18
1.69±0.43
Table 6: Experimental results for VQA open-ended question for bias misalignment on FACET dataset.
Bold indicates the best result for each baseline, while underline denotes the second-best result.
VQA-
Bias-1
LLaVA-1.5
PaliGemma
|MRM −MRF|
MRO
MRC
|MRM −MRF|
MRO
MRC
Baseline
3.07±1.18
6.14±0.48
6.91±0.75
3.51±1.07
4.44±0.41
5.72±0.84
CLIP-clip
3.82±1.29
6.33±0.47
7.48±0.84
2.12±0.81
2.93±0.66
1.98±0.27
SFID
2.97±1.18
6.10±0.44
6.89±0.70
1.03±0.92
4.45±0.39
4.61±0.45
DeAR
6.17±1.29
6.19±0.46
8.76±1.04
3.53±1.13
4.60±0.38
5.86±0.85
VDD
2.02±1.11
5.73±0.47
6.09±0.61
2.29±1.02
4.69±0.42
5.25±0.63
Prompt
6.47±1.54
10.94±0.63
12.75±1.54
5.18±1.16
5.25±0.44
7.43±0.96
ALA-BA
2.86±2.74
6.03±1.33
6.71±1.86
2.55±1.03
4.50±0.42
5.24±0.73
ALA-N
1.25±0.93
5.78±0.45
5.96±0.50
1.06±0.72
3.31±0.34
3.50±0.42
J
COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCE
K
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF LOGIT SPACE
To quantitatively analyze how each debiasing method alters the model’s output distribution, we
measured the entropy of the logits during text generation in VQA-Task-2, debiasing the toxicity. This
analysis allows us to understand the mechanism behind each method’s performance by examining the
shape of the probability distribution over different sets of tokens.
K.1
METHODOLOGY
For each token generation step, we first compute the probability distribution P over the entire
vocabulary by applying a softmax function to the logit vector z. The overall entropy is the Shannon
entropy of this distribution, calculated as H(P) = −P
i pi log pi.
For a more granular analysis, we partitioned the vocabulary into two disjoint sets based on pre-
computed token bias scores (β): undesirable/toxic (High Bias, β > 0.01) and desirable/non-toxic
(Low Bias, β < −0.01). We then computed the conditional entropy for each partition, which is the
entropy calculated only over the renormalized probabilities of the tokens within that set.
K.2
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS
Our quantitative analysis reveals the unique characteristics of our proposed method, ALA-BA.
Table 10 shows that ALA-BA is a decisive intervention, achieving a low mean entropy (1.6713) that
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 7: Experimental results for VQA open-ended question for stereotypical bias on SocialCounter-
factuals dataset. Bold indicates the best result for each baseline, while underline denotes the second
best result.
VQA-
Bias-2
LLaVA-1.5
PaliGemma
DP
max (↓)
DR
max (↓)
DG
max (↓)
Dmean (↓)
DP
max (↓)
DR
max (↓)
DG
max (↓)
Dmean (↓)
Baseline
1.07±0.18
0.64±0.17
0.40±0.13
0.70
8.62±1.32
6.11±1.37
3.52±1.16
6.08
CLIP-clip (G)
2.60±0.48
1.78±0.41
0.91±0.38
1.76
7.19±1.10
10.94±1.30
5.47±1.02
7.87
CLIP-clip (R)
1.50±0.18
0.41±0.13
0.19±0.11
0.70
4.46±1.19
6.29±1.31
2.72±1.09
4.49
SFID (G)
1.09±0.18
0.60±0.18
0.42±0.14
0.70
8.07±1.28
7.77±1.43
1.37±1.04
5.74
SFID (R)
1.08±0.18
0.61±0.18
0.42±0.14
0.70
8.17±1.26
7.26±1.47
1.94±1.09
5.79
DeAR
1.33±0.19
0.59±0.16
0.36±0.13
0.76
7.98±1.30
5.59±1.29
3.52±1.15
5.70
VDD
5.34±0.64
1.52±0.49
0.58±0.38
2.48
7.87±1.21
6.19±1.29
1.02±0.75
5.03
Prompt
1.05±0.22
0.83±0.21
0.39±0.18
0.76
8.41±1.25
5.01±1.24
2.73±1.19
5.38
ALA-BA
1.04±0.17
0.59±0.16
0.33±0.14
0.65
6.50±1.34
3.70±1.11
3.23±1.19
4.48
ALA-N
0.91±0.15
0.62±0.16
0.27±0.13
0.60
4.64±0.73
4.31±0.77
2.49±0.61
3.81
Table 8: Experimental results for the VQA-as-judge task on the FACET dataset. Red indicates notable
degradation. ALA-BA preserves the original model’s accuracy, showing no observed degradation,
whereas other methods often reduce accuracy level.
VQA-Task-3
LLaVA-1.5
PaliGemma
Accuracy (↑)
Female
Male
Overall
DW CA
Female
Male
Overall
DW CA
Baseline
88.76±0.48
86.34±0.32
86.96±0.28
-
82.07±0.62
86.45±0.33
85.32±0.28
-
CLIP-clip
89.07±0.50
85.97±0.32
86.77±0.28
-0.37
79.47±0.63
88.22±0.31
85.96±0.27
-2.60
SFID-BA
88.70±0.49
86.34±0.31
86.95±0.25
-0.06
82.60±0.59
85.83±0.34
85.00±0.28
-0.62
DeAR
86.53±0.54
87.98±0.30
87.60±0.26
-2.23
81.60±0.59
86.68±0.33
85.36±0.28
-0.47
VDD
88.38±0.49
87.01±0.31
87.36±0.26
-0.38
81.61±0.64
87.01±0.32
85.61±0.30
-0.46
ALA-BA
88.72±0.48
86.34±0.32
86.97±0.26
-0.04
82.07±0.58
86.41±0.32
85.31±0.28
-0.04
Table 9: Compute Resources Used for Experiments
Component
Details
CPU
AMD EPYC 7313 16-Core Processor
GPU
NVIDIA RTX A5000
indicates confident steering of the language model. Its high standard deviation (1.9425) suggests this
steering is adaptive, applying corrective force variably as needed.
Table 10: Overall logit entropy statistics for each debiasing method. A lower mean entropy indicates
a more confident output distribution. ALA-BA’s high standard deviation suggests an adaptive
intervention strategy.
Method
Mean
Std
Min
Max
Baseline
1.7498
1.8109
0.0108
5.2951
CLIP-clip
1.3159
1.3838
0.0078
5.1445
SFID
2.2589
1.9786
0.1394
5.5039
DeAR
1.7498
1.8109
0.0108
5.2951
VDD
2.0867
1.8935
0.1099
5.2953
Prompt
1.8136
1.8240
0.0108
5.3562
ALA-BA
1.6713
1.9425
0.0796
5.2951
Table 11 details the nature of this intervention. The ideal debiasing method should produce a diverse,
high-entropy distribution over undesirable tokens (showing no single toxic word is favored) and a
focused, low-entropy distribution over desirable tokens (to show confident guidance).
• Distribution over Undesirable Tokens: ALA-BA achieves an entropy of 0.1925 over
the toxic (High Bias) tokens. This is a high-entropy distribution compared to the baseline
(0.1398), demonstrating that our method effectively diffuses focus away from any single
toxic word, making the model’s undesirable choices less predictable and more evenly
suppressed.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Distribution over Desirable Tokens: ALA-BA’s intervention results in a more focused,
lower-entropy distribution (0.9808) over the desirable (Low Bias) tokens compared to the
baseline (1.0351). This shows that our method is not merely suppressing undesirable words,
but is also decisively guiding the model’s output towards a specific, high-quality set of
non-toxic alternatives.
In summary, the entropy analysis demonstrates that ALA-BA successfully achieves the desired
dual outcomes. It creates a diverse, high-entropy distribution over undesirable words (effective
suppression) while simultaneously creating a focused, low-entropy distribution over desirable words
(confident guidance), a combination not achieved by the other methods except CLIP-clip.
Table 11: Conditional entropy for undesirable/toxic (High Bias) and desirable/non-toxic (Low Bias)
token sets. ALA-BA achieves the desired high-entropy distribution over toxic words and low-entropy
distribution over desirable words.
Method
High Bias Tokens Entropy
Low Bias Tokens Entropy
Baseline
0.1398
1.0351
CLIP-clip
0.2351
0.7874
SFID
0.1921
1.2649
DeAR
0.1398
1.0351
VDD
0.1957
1.1885
Prompt
0.1461
1.0717
ALA-BA
0.1925
0.9808
L
SCALABILITY TO SOTA MODELS: PROMPT BASELINE & INSTRUCTION
FOLLOWING
We hypothesize that the failure of the “Prompt” baseline in our initial experiments might have been
due to the weaker instruction-following capabilities of older models. To test this, we conducted new
experiments with Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct Team (2025), which possesses superior instruction-
following capabilities.
As shown in Table 12, the “Prompt” baseline still failed, degrading fairness (MRC increased from
2.11 →3.56) even on this state-of-the-art model. This confirms that the issue is not the model’s
ability to follow instructions, but the inherent instability of the prompting method itself.
Table 12: Results on VQA-Task-1 for Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct.
Method
MRM −MRF
MRO (Overall Error)
MRC (Composite)
Baseline
0.39 ± 0.38
2.08 ± 0.29
2.11 ± 0.29
Prompt
0.89 ± 0.80
3.43 ± 0.36
3.56 ± 0.43
ALA-BA
0.42 ± 0.41
1.91 ± 0.28
1.94 ± 0.30
ALA-N
0.02 ± 0.02
0.01 ± 0.01
0.03 ± 0.03
We attribute the failure of prompting to its inability to handle classifier uncertainty, a problem ALA is
specifically designed to solve.
• Prompting (Binary/Hard): The prompt-based method forces a binary decision. Even if the
external classifier is uncertain (e.g., 51% confidence) or incorrect on an ambiguous image,
the prompt converts this into a “hard” fact: “The gender is male.” The LMM, being a good
instruction follower, adheres to this (potentially wrong) fact, leading to hallucinations or
errors.
• ALA (Continuous/Soft): In contrast, ALA utilizes the continuous score (s) from the
classifier. As detailed in Appendix G, our classifier yields a score near zero for ambiguous
images. In these cases, ALA naturally produces a “neutralization effect” (s ≈0), rather
than forcing a specific gender.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In short, ALA robustly handles ambiguous inputs by neutralizing them, whereas prompting forces
the model to commit to a potentially incorrect binary label.
M
EXTENSION TO DIVERSE VQA TASKS (DISCRIMINATIVE REASONING)
Evaluating the model’s capabilities beyond captioning is vital to demonstrate generality. To address
this, we introduce VQA-Task-4: Occupation Recognition. Unlike the generative tasks (Task 1 & 2),
this is a discriminative classification task that tests the model’s ability to perform visual reasoning
without relying on social stereotypes.
We utilize the FACET dataset to identify “confusion pairs” of occupations that are known to be heavily
gender-skewed. We specifically focus on the “Doctor vs. Nurse” pair, where models frequently
misclassify Female Doctors as “Nurses” due to linguistic priors. We use the discriminative prompt:
“Is this person a doctor or a nurse?”
To solve this, we apply ALA-BA by training a lightweight profession classifier (linear layer on frozen
embeddings) to serve as the external image classifier f image.
• Occupation Target Signal (s): The image classifier analyzes the visual features (e.g.,
stethoscope, white coat) and outputs a target score s corresponding to the true profession
(e.g., “Doctor”), regardless of the subject’s gender.
• Logic: When the LMM attempts to generate “Nurse” due to language bias (e.g., “She” →
“Nurse”), ALA detects the discrepancy between the text bias α (“Nurse”) and the image
signal s (“Doctor”). It then steers the logits to align with the visual evidence s, effectively
correcting the stereotypical error.
We report the Stereotypical Error Rate (SER), defined as the average of the error rates for counter-
stereotypical examples: SER = 1
2(EFemale→Nurse + EMale→Doctor).
Table 13: Performance on VQA-Task-4 (Occupation Recognition) using LLaVA.
Method
Female Dr →Nurse
Male Nurse →Dr
SER
Overall Error
Baseline
94.43%
8.45%
51.44%
36.01%
ALA (λ = 1)
71.78%
4.73%
38.26%
23.28%
ALA (λ = 2)
20.91%
7.09%
14.00%
10.62%
The baseline results in Table 13 confirm a severe bias: LLaVA misclassifies 94.43% of Female
Doctors as Nurses. Applying ALA (λ = 2) drastically reduces this stereotypical error to 20.91%,
decreasing the SER to 14.00%. This result is crucial because it demonstrates that ALA is not limited
to “tagging”. It effectively intervenes in the model’s reasoning process. By suppressing logit-level
gender priors, ALA restores the model’s ability to perform accurate, discriminative visual recognition.
N
GRANULAR ERROR ANALYSIS
To provide a more transparent picture of ALA’s behavior, we analyzed the absolute misclassification
counts (Male-to-Female vs. Female-to-Male errors) at varying logit adjustment strengths (λ) using
the PaliGemma model on VQA-Task-1.
As shown in Table 14, the baseline model is highly imbalanced, exhibiting a strong intrinsic bias
toward “Female” predictions (411 M2F errors vs. 284 F2M errors). As λ increases, the total
misgendered count drops consistently. However, we observe asymmetric correction dynamics. At
moderate λ values (e.g., λ = 10.0), F2M errors are corrected aggressively (dropping by ∼86%),
while M2F errors remain persistent. Because the baseline model has a dominant female prior, the
logits for female tokens are highly confident. Consequently, ALA-N requires a stronger suppression
force (higher λ) to override the dominant female prediction compared to the weaker male prediction.
At high λ values (e.g., λ = 100.0), this asymmetry disappears, as the suppression penalty overcomes
the baseline priors entirely, forcing the model to neutral tokens and leading to a massive collapse in
both error types.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 14: Absolute Misclassification Counts on PaliGemma (VQA-Task-1) under varying λ.
λ
M2F Errors
F2M Errors
Total Misgendered
0.0 (Baseline)
411
284
695
10.0
402
39
441
100.0
16
14
30
O
SCALING TO MULTIPLE ATTRIBUTES (INTERSECTIONAL DEBIASING)
Real-world debiasing often requires addressing multiple protected attributes simultaneously (e.g.,
Race and Gender). To address this, we extended our framework to an Intersectional Logit Processor.
A key advantage of ALA is its signal agnosticism: it can ingest debiasing signals from diverse
sources (neural or symbolic) and aggregate them into a single logit adjustment.
We sum the adjustments from independent sources:
z′ = z −λgender(αgender −sgender)βgender −λrace(αrace −srace)βrace
(7)
We demonstrate the adaptability of ALA to data availability by integrating two different types of
signals:
1. Gender (Trained): We use our standard trained classifier (f text
gender) because high-quality
labeled data (Bias-in-Bios) is available to learn complex gender signals.
2. Race (Rule-Based): For race, no comparable large-scale dataset exists to train a reliable text
classifier for short captions. To overcome this data scarcity, we implemented a rule-based
symbolic detector. This detector identifies the presence of explicit racial descriptors (e.g.,
“Indian”, “Asian”) via dictionary matching. We then set the target srace to eliminate this
signal.
We applied this joint adjustment to the FACET dataset and evaluated it on three specific metrics to
quantify intersectional fairness:
• Avg Racial: The average frequency of explicit racial descriptors appearing in the generated
text across all evaluated images.
• Max Gap: The maximum disparity in the frequency of racial descriptors between any two
distinct racial groups, measuring parity across demographics.
• Gender MRC: The composite gender misclassification rate, as defined in Section 3.1.
Table 15: Performance of Intersectional Debiasing on FACET using LLaVA.
Method
Avg Racial (↓)
Max Gap (↓)
Gender MRC (↓)
Baseline
28.21 ± 6.67
6.77 ± 0.82
6.89 ± 0.72
Gender Debias Only
31.63 ± 0.70
6.54 ± 1.83
3.80 ± 0.55
Race Debias Only
0.19 ± 0.08
0.29 ± 0.21
6.92 ± 0.73
Gender + Race (Intersectional)
0.71 ± 0.11
0.65 ± 0.21
3.91 ± 0.60
The results in Table 15 confirm the scalability of our method. Applying Gender Debias Only
effectively reduces gender bias (MRC 6.89 →3.80) but leaves racial descriptors high. Conversely,
Race Debias Only removes racial keywords (Avg Racial 28.21 →0.19) but neglects gender. The
intersectional configuration successfully combines both, reducing Avg Racial to 0.71 and Gender
MRC to 3.91 simultaneously without conflict.
The following captions generated for a single image illustrate the specific effect of each configuration:
• Baseline: “The image features a woman dressed in traditional Indian garb, standing on a
stage and performing a dance. She is holding a large, colorful bowl on her head...”
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Gender Debias: “In a lively outdoor scene, a group of people is enjoying a festival. A
beautiful Indian dancer is performing a dance, holding a large orange bowl...” (Removes
gendered “woman”, preserves racial “Indian”)
• Race Debias: “The image features a woman dressed in traditional clothing, standing on a
stage and performing a dance. She is holding a large, colorful bowl on her head...” (Removes
racial “Indian”, preserves gendered “woman”)
• Intersectional Debias: “In a lively outdoor scene, a group of people is enjoying a festival.
A beautiful young dancer is performing a traditional dance, standing on a platform and
holding a large bowl on top of it.” (Removes both attributes)
P
THE USE OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS (LLMS)
We employed an LLM as a writing assistant during the preparation of this manuscript. The LLM’s role
was strictly limited to improving the grammar, clarity, and phrasing of existing text. Each modification
suggested by the model was carefully reviewed by the authors to ensure the original scientific meaning
and technical details remained accurate and unchanged. The LLM did not contribute to the core
research ideation, methodology, experimental results, or conclusions presented in this paper. The
authors take full responsibility for all content in this manuscript.
27