--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
PRIOR-BASED NOISY TEXT DATA FILTERING:
FAST AND STRONG ALTERNATIVE FOR PERPLEXITY
Yeongbin Seo
Gayoung Kim
Jaehyung Kim †
Jinyoung Yeo †
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Yonsei University
{suhcrates,kykim,jaehyungk,jinyeo}@yonsei.ac.kr
ABSTRACT
As large language models (LLMs) are pretrained on massive web corpora, careful
selection of data becomes essential to ensure effective and efficient learning. While
perplexity (PPL)-based filtering has demonstrated strong performance, it suffers
from drawbacks: substantial time costs and inherent unreliability of the model
when handling noisy or out-of-distribution samples. In this work, we propose a
simple yet powerful alternative: a prior-based data filtering method that estimates
token priors using corpus-level term frequency statistics, inspired by linguistic
insights on word roles and lexical density. Our approach filters documents based
on the mean and standard deviation of token priors, serving as a fast proxy to
PPL while requiring no model inference. Despite its simplicity, the prior-based
filter achieves the highest average performance across 20 downstream benchmarks,
while reducing time cost by over 1000× compared to PPL-based filtering. We
further demonstrate its applicability to symbolic languages such as code and math,
and its dynamic adaptability to multilingual corpora without supervision. The code
is available online (https://github.com/ybseo-ac/prior_filter).
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance by training on massive
datasets, with web text serving as a primary data source. As web content continues to grow indefinitely,
it offers unlimited data for pretraining. However, two major challenges necessitate careful filtering
steps: (1) Web data is so large that we need to choose efficiently to save computational resources, and
(2) It contains a lot of noise, which can harm the model if not properly filtered.
To address this need, various data selection methods have been proposed. Early approaches relied
on heuristic rules (Raffel et al., 2023; Bane et al., 2022), but more recent trends have shifted toward
model-based techniques (Xie et al., 2023b; Marion et al., 2023). These methods typically involve
training a reference model on a target dataset and using it to identify desirable data. The model may
perform binary classification (Xie et al., 2023a) or compute similarity with the reference dataset (Xie
et al., 2023b). Among these, using the perplexity (PPL) score from a reference model as a criterion
of filtering is currently known to offer the best performance while maintaining a relatively simple
implementation (Ankner et al., 2024). We provide a more detailed review of related work in §A.
However, PPL-based approaches come with the following inherent limitations. (1) Time cost: These
methods require training a reference model, followed by inference of PPL over the whole corpus.
Given that web-scale data can easily exceed trillions of documents and continues to grow, performing
inference over the entire corpus becomes prohibitively expensive. (2) Reliability: LLMs often fail to
accurately assess samples from distributions that is not seen while training, such as noisy data. As a
result, generative perplexity may sometimes assign high scores to noisy or low-quality text (Holtzman
et al., 2020; Welleck et al., 2019). This issue might become more pronounced when using smaller
models to reduce inference costs, further undermining reliability.
†Co-corresponding authors
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
To address this limitation of the PPL-based approach, we introduce a prior-based data filtering
method grounded in linguistic insights. Instead of computing the full conditional probability of each
token in the data p(xi|x<i) ∝p(x<i|xi)p(xi) (xi is token of a data d), this method focuses solely on
estimating the prior term p(xi) with statistical metric such as term-frequency. It is extremely simple
and significantly faster (almost 0.1% time consumption compared to PPL-based), while it achieves
even better performance on downstream task benchmarks.
Interestingly, this method is inspired by traditional techniques used in deciphering ancient languages.
The 8th-century linguist Al-Kindi first proposed that, in order to decipher an encrypted language,
analyzing the frequency of its words provides a clue (Al-Kadit, 1992). If some word appears with the
highest frequency across multiple documents, it is likely to correspond to a function word, such as
"is" or "a" in English. This indicates that term-frequency itself is a one-dimensional representation
for the role of a word: high frequency maps to function words while relatively low frequency maps
to content words (e.g., “US”, “president”). Combining with another linguistic observation that
well-formed sentences within a language tend to exhibit a consistent level of lexical density (i.e., ratio
between function and content words) (Johansson, 2008), we can determine outlier document simply
by computing the mean and variance of its term frequencies: which we term prior-based data filter.
The prior-based filter exhibits intriguing and practical properties, which we demonstrate empirically.
(1) The linguistic principles underlying the term-frequency hold not only for English but also for other
natural languages (e.g., Chinese and French), even for symbolic languages (e.g., code, mathematics).
(2) Only a small amount of Chinese text data mixed into an English corpus may be noise and models
can not learn patterns from it; however, as its amount increases, it becomes learnable by models. The
prior-based filter is capable of automatically capturing this transition of learnability.
We demonstrate that models pretrained using the prior-based filter outperform models using the
PPL-based filter, across 20 diverse downstream task benchmarks. Moreover, since token priors can
be estimated from a relatively small corpus, the prior-based filter is approximately 1000 times faster,
requiring only 0.25 hours compared to 216 GPU hours for PPL-based filtering on a 6B-token corpus.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the prior-based filter as an approximate alternative to the PPL-based filter.
• We analyze the useful properties of the prior-based filter, including its efficiency and
generalizability.
• Through extensive downstream benchmarks, we demonstrate that the prior-based filter is
not only faster, but also outperforms the current state-of-the-art PPL-based filtering.
2
PRIOR IS A ONE-DIMENSIONAL REPRESENTATION FOR THE ROLE OF TOKEN
In this section, we first introduce PPL-based approach, which is the previous SOTA for data filtering.
Then we define how to estimate the prior, a key component of PPL. We then analyze the linguistic
properties and significance of the prior, to show its potential as an effective criterion for data filtering.
2.1
PPL-BASED APPROACH AND ESTIMATION OF PRIOR
The PPL-based filtering method is known as the most effective approach for filtering noise data from
web text corpus for pretraining LLMs (Ankner et al., 2024; Marion et al., 2023). For the filtering, first,
a small reference model θ (an autoregressive transformer architecture of 137M parameters) is trained
on the corpus D. The model then computes the PPL for each data point d = (x1, x2, . . . , xN), where
xi is the token at the ith position of a document, and d ∈D. Then, d with PPL values farthest from
the median are discarded. Here, the PPL is defined as follows:
PPL(d) =
" N
Y
i=1
pθ(xi|x<i)
# 1
N
(1)
pθ(xi | x<i) is the conditional probability of token xi given its preceding context x<i under the
model θ, that can be decomposed into likelihood and prior as follows.
pθ(xi | x<i) ∝pθ(x<i | xi) · pθ(xi)
(2)
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In this Bayesian formulation, the likelihood term pθ(x<i | xi) captures the dependency between the
token xi and its preceding context x<i, indicating how well the token aligns with the surrounding text.
In contrast, the prior term pθ(xi) represents the marginal probability of the token xi, independent of
its context.
Estimation of prior
Due to the independent property of prior, it is no longer necessary for a
transformer model to learn the joint probability in order to estimate the prior. Therefore, in this work,
we assume the prior pθ(x) of a token x is approximated by simple statistics (i.e., term-frequency) in a
corpus D, estimated as follows: pprior(x) =
fD(x)
P
x′∈V fD(x′). Here, fD(x) is the number of occurrences
of token x in corpus D, V is the vocabulary set.
2.2
FREQUENCY ANALYSIS IN LINGUISTICS
To justify the use of a token prior as a filtering criterion, we draw on linguistic insights that reveal
its strong connection to lexical and syntactic structure. Linguistics offers two key insights related to
term frequency, and by combining them, we can derive its potential utility as a data filtering criterion.
(1) Term frequency is a 1-dimensional representation of a word’s role: The 8th-century linguist
Al-Kindi first proposed an idea that is still widely used today (Al-Kadit, 1992): to decipher ancient
or encrypted languages, analyzing the frequency of its words gives a clue. If some word appears
with the highest frequency across multiple documents, it is likely to correspond to a function word
(e.g., "is" or "a" in English) that serves grammatical roles. In contrast, content words which carry
semantic meaning (e.g., “US”, “president”) tend to appear with relatively lower frequency. Therefore,
frequency itself can serve as a basis for distinguishing between function words and content words. In
other words, term frequency (i.e., prior) can be seen as a one-dimensional representation of a word’s
functional role. We analyze that this property partially stems from the next property.
(2) Well-formed sentences typically exhibit a consistent range of lexical density: As lexical
density is defined as the proportion of content words against function words, it is known that well-
formed sentences in a language typically maintain a certain range of lexical density (Johansson,
2008). From this, we can infer that broken and ill-formed sentences will deviate significantly from
this range to be outliers.
By combining these two properties, we can derive a principle for identifying ill-formed documents.
First, we use the token prior as a one-dimensional representation to estimate whether each token
functions more like a content or function word. Then, by assessing the overall composition of function
and content words, we can determine whether the document is an outlier.
3
PRIOR-BASED DATA FILTERING
In this section, we present an explanation and analysis of the prior-based data filtering method. (1) We
first analyze the token-level term frequencies, demonstrating that linguistic insights are applicable at
the token level. (2) We then apply this principle to build our filtering method. (3) Lastly, we validate
its feasibility by analyzing data samples filtered by our approach.
In §C, we further provide a theoretical and empirical explanation that the prior-based filter generalizes
across diverse types of languages and tokenizers.
3.1
ANALYSIS ON THE TOKEN PRIOR
We first analyze the token-level term frequencies by calculating the token priors (with formulation in
§2.1) on the Dolma dataset (Soldaini et al., 2024). As we sort them by the logarithm (Figure 1), we
can observe that the token priors distinctly fall into three clusters based on their height and slope,
supporting the thesis that the token prior serves as a 1-dimensional representation for the token’s role.
The three clusters in Figure 1 are as follows. (1) High-prior zone: a steep slope of high-prior tokens.
We can observe that this zone mainly consists of function words (e.g., “the”, “a”, “is”, “you”). (2)
Middle-prior zone: As the priors in this zone have a similar range, they form a wide and gentle slope.
This zone seems to mainly contain tokens for content words (e.g., “Phone”, “shortcut”, “tackles”,
“doorstep”). (3) Low-prior zone: The frequency is extremely low, and the slope becomes steep
again. This region is primarily composed of accidental noise tokens (e.g., “=˜=˜’’, “ÃˆhÃ ˆHÃˆhÃ ˆHÃˆh”,
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 1: The line graph shows the logarithm of token priors (based on the GPT-2 tokenizer) computed
from the Dolma dataset, sorted in descending order. The boxed regions highlight tokens from the top,
middle, and bottom segments of the rank.
“ ˙Gã ˆHµãˆh¼ã”), including tokens from other language types that appear only a few times in the data
(e.g., Chinese in English corpus).
3.2
FORMULATION OF PRIOR-BASED DATA FILTERING
We established two premises in §2.2: (1) A token’s prior serves as a representation of its functional
role, distinguishing function words from content words. (2) In a given language, a well-formed
document typically maintains an average level of lexical density. By assessing the overall composition
of function and content words, we can determine whether the document is an outlier.
However, since the prior is a continuous value rather than a discrete class label, we cannot directly
compute the lexical ratio to assess the composition. Instead, we propose two alternative indicators to
approximate the composition: the mean and standard deviation of token priors within a document.
(1) Prior mean:
Since well-formed documents are clustered around a certain range of lexical
density, the mean of token priors within such documents should also cluster around a certain value.
(2) Prior standard deviation:
Given that well-formed documents tend to exhibit a stable lexical
density, the variance (or standard deviation) of token priors within a document should also cluster
around a specific value. We denote these metrics as µd and σd respectively, formulating as follows.
Specifically, we define the prior mean with a logarithmic transformation, as it aligns with the prior
term in the PPL formulation; this is discussed in more detail in §3.4.1:
µd = Exi∈d [log pprior(xi)] , σd = stdxi∈d [pprior(xi)] , d ∈D
(3)
As we assume that both µd and σd of a well-formed document are clustered around certain central
value, we define this central value as the median over the corpus D: Mµ = mediand∈D(µd), Mσ =
mediand∈D(σd). The distance from the median is then used as a measure of outlierness. δµ(d) =
|µd −Mµ| , δσ(d) = |σd −Mσ|. To perform filtering, we discard the samples with the large δ. The
discarded portion is defined as the filtered set Fµ, Fσ.
We analyze that the two criteria capture different aspects of the data. While δµ captures the compo-
sition of tokens in a document, reflecting whether the document predominantly consists of high or
low prior tokens, δσ reflects the distributional structure among tokens, indicating how uniformly or
diversely the token priors are spread. This difference is also observed in the outlier samples.
In §B, we provide a theoretical derivation of the noise-detection behavior induced by µd and σd, and
show that it approximates that of a PPL-based filter.
3.3
OBSERVATION ON DISTRIBUTION AND OUTLIER SAMPLES OF µd AND σd
We check whether the values of µd and σd are clustered around central points, as hypothesized. For
this, we randomly sample 600K examples from the Dolma dataset and compute µd and σd for each
d. As shown in Figure 2, both values exhibit broad distributions centered around their respective
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
medians, with relatively small deviations. Notably, beyond a certain threshold, we observe sharp
increases in deviation, forming clear outlier regions (highlighted by red dashed circles). Upon
inspecting these outlier samples, we find that they primarily consist of noisy documents lacking
meaningful information (boxes of Figure 2).
Figure 2: The line graph displays the values of µd and σd computed from token priors in the Dolma
dataset, sorted in descending order. Boxes are outlier samples from both distributions.
(a) µd with outlier samples
(b) σd with outlier samples
Characteristics of outliers from each metric We observe that the outliers for µd and σd exhibit
different characteristics. In the case µd, the outliers tend to consist of tokens with either extremely
high or extremely low prior values. For example, on the extreme-high side of the µd (left boxes of
Figure 2a), documents mainly consist of line breaks (‘\n’) or space characters (‘ ’), which is one of
the tokens with the highest prior. On the extreme-low side (right boxes of Figure 2a), documents are
often filled with non-English language or special characters.
Conversely, in the case of σd, many outlier documents contain content-word tokens with middle-prior
(boxes of Figure 2b). However, these words are arranged in unstructured ways, often appearing as a
list of nouns without sentence structure. These differences arise because the µd reflects the average
composition of tokens in a document, whereas the σd captures the distributional pattern of those
tokens. This suggests that both values should be used together for more effective data selection.
3.4
PROPERTIES OF PRIOR-BASED FILTER
3.4.1
PRIOR-BASED FILTER APPROXIMATES PPL-BASED FILTER
The prior-based filter serves as an approximation to the PPL-based filter. We support this claim
through both a formulation analysis and a statistical comparison of filtered data overlap.
log PPL(d) ∝
N
X
i
log pθ(x<i|xi)
|
{z
}
πlikelihood
+
N
X
i
log pθ(xi)
|
{z
}
πprior
(4)
First, the logarithmic form of PPL reveals that both the µd and σd express two components of the PPL.
(1) πprior: The formulation of µd in Equation 3 is exactly equivalent to the πprior. (2) πlikelihood:
as πlikelihood captures the regularity of relationships among tokens within a document, σd similarly
reflects the regularity in distribution of token priors. This suggests that the two measures are weakly
aligned. Taken together, combining µd and σd can serve as a reasonable proxy for perplexity.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Prior can be even better metric than PPL
While σd captures an approximation of the likelihood
term, it is significantly more saturated than the actual likelihood, which can be considered a limitation.
However, conversely, the inherent instability of the πlikelihood (described as follows) poses a limitation
for the PPL-based approach. (1) When the model is small, it struggles to accurately learn the likelihood
(Wei et al., 2022). (2) The model does not learn how to estimate likelihood for data from previously
unseen distributions (mostly noisy data), which is not a problem for estimating only the prior. For
this reason, previous studies have also reported that PPL often mistake repetitive or pattern-based
noise as valid text (Holtzman et al., 2020). Empirically, the model trained with the prior-based filter
shows better downstream performance than the one trained with the PPL-based filter (§4).
Figure 3: Extreme outlier samples selected based on three criteria, ensuring that each sample comes
from a distinct criterion: PPL, µd, and σd. ✓indicates filtered out.
In §B, we provide a theoretical explanation of how the prior-based filter approximates the noise-
detection behavior of the PPL-based filter, as well as the boundary conditions where a discrepancy
between the two emerges. We also explain why median-based thresholding is robust.
Observation on filtered samples
This characteristic of PPL is also observed in outlier samples.
We investigate the most extreme outlier samples from each metric (PPL, µd, σd), excluding their
overlaps (Figure 3). As described in §3.3, outliers of µd tend to be filled with extremely low or high
prior tokens (Figure 3b), while those of σd often consist of content words but lack function words
or valid sentence structure (Figure 3c). In outliers of PPL (Figure 3a), content and function words
appear to be well-balanced, giving the surface impression of well-formed sentences, but upon closer
reading, many of them turn out to be semantically meaningless. This may reveal both a strength
and a weakness of the PPL metric: it effectively captures subtle irregularities within well-formed
documents, but may fail to detect noise arising from entirely out-of-distribution samples.
Figure 4:
Overlap between outliers
based on µd and σd with those based on
PPL, when filtering the top and bottom
e
2% of samples (X-axis: e).
Statistical comparison
To demonstrate that prior-based
filtering approximates the PPL-based filter, we measure
the overlap ratio of data filtered by each metric. We first
randomly sample 600K examples from the Dolma dataset.
Then, for each value (µd, σd, PPL), we extract the data
points whose percentile rank falls within the top or bottom
e
2% (Figure 4). These are denoted as the filtered sets
Fµ, Fσ, and Fppl, respectively. For each filtered set, we
compute the overlap ratio with Fppl, defined as |F ∩Fppl|
|Fppl| .
The results show a strong correlation: When filtering by
the e = 0.10, nearly 50% of Fµ and Fppl overlap. We also
find Fµ aligns more closely with Fppl than Fσ. We provide
additional evidence in §E.2
3.4.2
µd REFLECTS LEARNABILITY OF MINOR LANGUAGE IN MULTI-LINGUAL SETTING
The prior mean value has the property of dynamically reflecting the learnability of a data cluster
(i.e., language type), especially when multiple clusters with distinct characteristics are mixed. For
example, consider a corpus primarily composed of English data with a small portion of Chinese data
included. While the Chinese samples may contain meaningful content, if their quantity is too small,
the model will fail to learn the pattern of language. In this case, Chinese data is no more than noise.
However, once the volume of Chinese data increases sufficiently, the model becomes able to interpret
the language, making it learnable and meaningful data.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The prior-based filter captures this dynamic behavior without any special tuning. As shown in
Figure 3, prior mean values tend to classify non-English samples as noise when they are sparsely
mixed into English data. However, when the proportion of such data exceeds a certain threshold, the
filter begins to treat them as valid language rather than noise.
Figure 5: Proportion of Chinese data
classified as outliers (Y-axis), after mix-
ing Chinese and English data at a ratio
of a : 100 (a as X-axis). Outliers are the
top and bottom 5% of µd.
To demonstrate this, we add a Chinese dataset (Wiki-ch)1
to an English corpus (Dolma), with the Chinese data scaled
to a% of the English corpus size. We then measure the
percentage of added Chinese samples that fall into the
outlier set (percentile rank falls within the top or bottom
10%). As shown in Figure 5, when the size of the Chinese
data is only 1% relative to the English data, nearly all of it
is classified as noise. However, once its proportion exceeds
20%, the rate of being classified as outliers drops to a level
comparable to random filtering (10%, indicated by the red
dashed line).
This characteristic offers a major advantage over methods
that require manually specifying a reference dataset (e.g.,
DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b)). In DSIR, a human must decide
whether to select English or Chinese data and then pro-
vide a suitable reference dataset accordingly. In contrast,
the prior-based filter automatically determines whether a
language should be filtered out based on its learnability.
3.4.3
FAST, SCALABLE FILTERING USING SUBSAMPLED PRIORS
Figure 6: When token prior is computed
with b% subset of Dolma (X-axis is b),
the proportion of outliers overlapping
with those from b = 100 is on the left
Y-axis. The right Y-axis shows the com-
putation time (in minutes) required to
calculate the token prior at each b.
One of the key advantages of the prior-based filter over
model-based methods lies in its efficiency. Given the mas-
sive volume of new web data, which rapidly grows daily,
training and inferring PPL value with a reference model
can significantly amplify the time cost of filtering. In con-
trast, the prior-based filter only requires computing term
frequencies and then calculating the mean and standard
deviation of the priors.
Remarkably, the already minimal computation time of
the prior-based filter can be further reduced. For a 6B-
token corpus, the entire process takes about 35 minutes on
40 CPUs (Intel Xeon Silver 4210R @ 2.40GHz), which
consists of two stages: assessing the token prior, and com-
puting µd and σd. Among these, the most time-consuming
step is the token prior assessing phase, which alone takes
around 30 minutes.
This assessment time can be significantly reduced, as term-frequency estimates remain highly
consistent even when calculated from a small subset of the data. To verify this, we sample b% of a
6B-token dataset to compute the token prior and then measure how much the resulting outlier set
(top/bottom 10%) overlaps with the outlier set derived from the full corpus (b = 100). As shown in
Figure 6, even with just b = 1%, the extracted outliers are nearly identical to those from full corpus;
requiring only about 70 seconds, or roughly one minute.
4
EXPERIMENT ON DOWNSTREAM TASK
Table 1: Dolma v1.6 com-
position and its proportions
based on token count.
Source
Document type
portion
Common Crawl
web pages
74.6%
The Stack
code
13.4%
C4
web page
6.5%
Reddit
social media
2.9%
PeS20
educational papers
2.3%
Project Gutenberg
books
0.2%
Wikipedia, Wikibooks
encyclopedic
0.1%
In this section, we evaluate the downstream task performance of
models pretrained with different data filtering methods. Most training
settings and hyperparameters follow those of “Perplexed by perplexity:
Perplexity-based data pruning with small reference model (Ankner
et al., 2024)”. We first conduct experiments on a natural language
1https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/notoookay/chinese-wikipedia-2023
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(specified to English) web corpus, Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024). This allows us to assess the effects
on general language capabilities of a model (e.g., knowledge, language understanding, and symbolic
understanding). To demonstrate that our prior-based method is applicable even to symbolic languages
such as code and math, we also perform experiments on the Pile-github2 dataset.
4.1
EXPERIMENT ON NATURAL LANGUAGE CORPUS AND GENERAL ABILITY
Corpus setup
Following Ankner et al. (2024), we mainly use Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024) as a
pretraining corpus for a testbed of filtering methods. Dolma is a large-scale, diverse web-text corpus,
designed for training and evaluating LLMs. It contains noisy web data sources that support general
language use ability, such as world knowledge, commonsense reasoning, and symbolic problem
solving. This corpus is composed of multiple web-scale datasets, including Common Crawl, Reddit,
Wikipedia, and Wikibooks3, The Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022), C4 (Raffel et al., 2023), PeS2o
(Soldaini & Lo, 2023), Project Gutenberg (Angelescu, 2013) (see Table 1). Among these, Common
Crawl accounts for the major portion (74.5%) of the corpus. This makes it a particularly suitable
environment for evaluating filtering methods, as it contains a high proportion of noisy web content
that must be thoroughly filtered, while a small but valuable subset (e.g., books and educational data)
must be preserved. For testing under resource constraints, we select v1.6—a smaller subset with 6.3B
tokens. We divide this into blocks (d) of 512 tokens, and select a subset of N tokens for pretraining.
Baseline setup
When selecting a subset from Dolma, we follow the procedure defined by each
method: (1) no-filter: Randomly selects N without applying any filtering method. (2) PPL-based:
Following the approach of Ankner et al. (2024) and §2.1, we first train a reference model (137M)
on the random 3B tokens subset of dataset. We then compute the PPL score for each sample in the
dataset. To obtain a final subset of size N, we discard samples with the highest and lowest PPL
scores. (3) DSIR: Adopting the well-known method DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b), we estimate n-gram
frequency from the reference dataset (we choose Bookcorpus and Wiki-en) and compute importance
weights. DSIR is proposed as an advancement of FastText, a classifier-based method using manual
data curation. (4) prior-based (ours): As described in §3.2, we first estimate token priors using a 10%
subset of the full corpus. Based on these priors, we compute µd and σd (d ∈D). We then discard
samples with the highest δµ and δσ values in the constraint of |Fµ| = |Fσ|, until the volume of final
subset |Fµ ∪Fσ| reaches N. For all baselines, N is set to 50% (3B), which is observed in Ankner
et al. (2024) to yield the best performance.
We use the GPT-2 architecture for pretraining, with large (1.5B) and small (137M) size models,
using 8 GPUs (RTX A5000). Following Ankner et al. (2024), we set a max token length of 512,
a global batch size 256, and a learning rate 2e-4, and train for 40K global steps (about 6B token
duration). According to Ankner et al. (2024), the relative performance trends observed at 40K steps
are maintained in later training steps.
As our study requires a significant amount of resources for pre-training across multiple baselines, we
carefully adopted settings and observations from recent representative works to ensure experimental
rigor under limited resources. We explain how our baseline lineup comprehensively covers the major
streams of previous works in §A.2. We also provide justification of our experimental scale (e.g.,
training token duration, model size) in §F.2.
Benchmark and evaluation setup
The types and settings of downstream tasks follow those used
in the Ankner et al. (2024), based on the MosaicML evaluation gauntlet (MosaicML, 2023). Gauntlet
includes tasks designed to assess five core capabilities: world knowledge, common sense reasoning,
language understanding, symbolic problem solving, and reading comprehension. We normalize the
accuracy of the individual task as an = am−ar
1−ar , where am is the accuracy of the model and ar is
the expected accuracy of random guessing. We report the average normalized accuracy for each
task, task category, and the average across all categories. Since some tasks are not proper for 1.5B
models, we exclude benchmarks with average an of baselines under 0.001. This results in a total of
20 benchmarks (details in §G)
Results
As described in Table 2, the results show that the model trained with prior-based filtering
achieves the highest average performance, with extremely small time cost. Key observations are
as follows: (1) DSIR outperforms no-filter, and PPL-based outperforms DSIR, which aligns with
2https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/dschettler8845/the-pile-github-files-part-01
3https://commoncrawl.org/, https://www.reddit.com/, https://dumps.wikimedia.org/
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
findings from previous research (Ankner et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2023b). (2) Prior-based filter
approximates PPL-based filter in principle, but yields better downstream performance. We analyze
that this is because PPL score depends on the model’s likelihood, which can be unstable. On the other
hand, the prior is based on simple word frequencies, so it gives a more stable and reliable signal. (3)
Though the prior-based model outperforms the PPL-based model in downstream performance, the
prior-based filtering requires significantly less processing time. PPL-based filtering takes 216 GPU
hours to select a 3B token subset (20 × 8 GPU hours of training the reference model, 7 × 8 GPU
hours of PPL inference), while prior-based filtering takes only 15 minutes (6 minutes of assessing
token prior, 6 minutes of calculating µd and σd in D)—under 0.1% of the time spent for PPL. This
demonstrates the superior scalability and efficiency of our approach.
Table 2: Performance and time cost (for filtering) of the
baselines pre-trained on Dolma across 20 benchmarks. The
average normalized accuracy is the average of all categories.
Avg: Avg normalized accuracy, W: World knowledge, C:
Commonsense reasoning, L: Language understanding, S:
Symbolic problem solving, R: Reading comprehension
Type
Time
Avg
W
C
L
S
R
1.5B model
vanilla
rule-based
-
5.78
5.52
0.44
6.14
13.22
3.59
FastText
classifier
3.6 hrs
7.09
6.71
6.11
6.89
11.93
3.82
DSIR
n-gram
4 hrs
7.56
7.03
6.84
7.31
12.67
3.97
PPL-based
model-based
216 GPU hrs
8.22
9.98
11.91
7.34
7.91
3.96
Prior-based
(ours)
0.25 hrs
9.20
9.53
11.27
10.31
11.13
3.79
137M model
vanilla
rule-based
-
4.96
4.96
1.81
1.47
12.83
3.70
FastText
classifier
3.6 hrs
5.39
5.12
4.29
1.74
12.31
3.49
DSIR
n-gram
4 hrs
5.60
5.68
4.93
1.97
11.60
3.80
PPL-based
model-based
216 GPU hours
5.26
5.47
6.53
2.90
7.84
3.58
Prior-based
(ours)
0.25 hours
6.65
5.03
9.13
4.22
11.21
3.66
(4) In symbolic problem solving, PPL-
based filtering performs the worst,
whereas prior-based filtering per-
forms competitively with other base-
lines.
This suggests that PPL fails
to capture small and meaningful seg-
ments of different types of data, while
prior-based filtering is more robust
in preserving them. This is due to
the property of µd that reflects the
learnability of multiple language types
(§3.4.2). (5) While no-filter performs
poorly across most abilities, it shows
the highest score in symbolic problem
solving. This might be because small
but meaningful portions of data (e.g.,
math or programming-related) are par-
tially filtered out in other methods, but retained in the no-filter. For a prior-based filter, this issue
can be handled by augmenting the small subset of the corpus for the targeted data type (i.e., datasets
focused on coding or mathematics). This adjustment is straightforward and incurs minimal effort.
(6) Across other skill categories, the prior-based method consistently outperforms other baselines or
performs comparably to the best-performing one, resulting in the highest overall performance. (7)
This trend remains consistent even for different-sized models.
Further analysis
As data filtering removes noisy data, which is often found in outliers, it inherently
risks discarding valuable minority data (e.g., a highly technical paper with rare terminology, a corpus
including minority languages) as a trade-off. In §D, we analyze the robustness of the prior-based
filter with respect to this trade-off.
In §C, we further provide a theoretical and empirical explanation that the prior-based filter generalizes
across diverse types of languages and tokenizers. We also provide analysis on the sensitivity to factors
such as block size and threshold in §E.
4.1.1
CONSISTENCY IN A LARGE-SCALE SETTING
We conduct experiments on larger models and datasets. For the efficiency of massive experiments, we
adopt the strongest baselines from previous experiments (PPL-based and prior-based). We evaluate
3B (Qwen2.5-3B) and 1.5B models with training up to 12B token durations (2× repetitions). The
results consistently demonstrate the superiority of the prior-based filter (Figure 7).
4.2
EXPERIMENT ON SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE CORPUS
We retain most of the settings from experiments of §4.1, including baselines and training configura-
tions, but change the pretraining corpus to Pile-github. From the subset of 6B tokens, we extract a
subset of 3B tokens with each filtering method. We exclude DSIR due to the difficulty of determining
an appropriate reference dataset for Pile-github. This is also a critical limitation of the DSIR.
Pile-github mainly consists of code scripts, additionally containing a little mathematical data and
natural language data. As it contains little information related to general language skills, such as
world knowledge, we limit the evaluation only to 6 symbolic problem-solving benchmarks in gauntlet.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) 3B model
(b) 1.5B model
Figure 7: Average normalized accuracy across 20 benchmarks.
Table 3: Performance of the baselines pre-trained on Pile-github
across 6 symbolic problem-solving benchmarks. CS: BIG-bench
cs algorithms, Dyck: BIG-bench dyck languages, Op: BIG-bench
operators, Ma: BIG-bench elementary math QA, GSM: GSM8k,
SVA: SVAMP
Time
Avg
CS
Dyck
Op
Ma
GSM
SVA
1.5B model
no-filter
-
9.51
35.75
12.30
5.71
1.15
0.15
2.00
PPL-based
224 GPU hours
11.21
37.42
20.60
7.14
2.09
0.00
0.00
Prior-based (ours)
0.26 hours
12.03
38.86
21.30
9.04
1.17
0.15
1.67
137M model
no-filter
-
10.15
37.87
16.30
5.23
1.52
0.00
0.00
PPL-based
224 GPU hours
9.82
40.45
14.10
1.42
2.61
0.07
0.33
Prior-based (ours)
0.26 hours
12.19
40.22
16.00
7.14
3.08
0.00
6.66
Results The observed results are
as follows: (1) Consistent with
the previous experiments, the
prior-based method achieves the
best performance with signifi-
cantly less time than the PPL-
based approach. (2) These find-
ings suggest that our methods
hold not only for natural lan-
guages (e.g., English, Chinese)
but also for artificial symbolic
languages (e.g., code, math).
This means that well-formed data
in a certain language type can be
identified via prior-based statistics, regardless of language type. (3) Math-related benchmarks (BIG-
bench elementary math QA, GSM8K, SVAMP) exhibit near-random performance across all baselines,
likely because the Pile-github dataset consists predominantly of code scripts.
5
CONCLUSION AND LIMITATION
We proposed a prior-based text data filtering method grounded in linguistic insight. The prior-
based filter serves as an approximation of PPL-based methods, while achieving superior downstream
performance and being over 1000× faster. Furthermore, it shows strong generalizability by performing
effectively even on symbolic languages. This enables efficient filtering of rapidly growing web text
data and provides a foundation for faster continual pretraining of LLMs.
However, since this method leverages linguistic properties, unlike other approaches such as PPL-based
filtering or DSIR, it is less suited for extension to other modalities such as image data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT), under AI Technology Development
for Commonsense Extraction, Reasoning, and Inference from Heterogeneous Data(2022-0-00077, RS-
2022-II220077, 50%), ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support program(IITP-2025-
RS-2024-00437102, 30%), Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Yonsei University)(RS-
2020-II201361, 20%). Jinyoung Yeo and Jaehyung Kim are the co-corresponding authors.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Amro Abbas, Kushal Tirumala, Dániel Simig, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S Morcos. Semdedup: Data-efficient
learning at web-scale through semantic deduplication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09540, 2023.
Ibrahim A Al-Kadit. Origins of cryptology: The arab contributions. Cryptologia, 16(2):97–126, 1992.
Radu Angelescu. GutenbergPy. https://github.com/raduangelescu/gutenbergpy, 2013. Ver-
sion 0.3.5, accessed August 2023.
Zachary Ankner, Cody Blakeney, Kartik Sreenivasan, Max Marion, Matthew L. Leavitt, and Mansheej Paul.
Perplexed by perplexity: Perplexity-based data pruning with small reference models, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2405.20541.
Fred Bane, Celia Soler Uguet, Wiktor Stribi˙zew, and Anna Zaretskaya. A comparison of data filtering methods
for neural machine translation. In Janice Campbell, Stephen Larocca, Jay Marciano, Konstantin Savenkov,
and Alex Yanishevsky (eds.), Proceedings of the 15th Biennial Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas (Volume 2: Users and Providers Track and Government Track), pp. 313–325,
Orlando, USA, September 2022. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2022.amta-upg.22/.
Adrien Barbaresi. Trafilatura: A web scraping library and command-line tool for text discovery and extraction.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 122–131, 2021.
Janek Bevendorff, Benno Stein, Matthias Hagen, and Martin Potthast. Elastic chatnoir: Search engine for the
clueweb and the common crawl. In European conference on information retrieval, pp. 820–824. Springer,
2018.
Stella Biderman, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Shivanshu
Purohit, and Edward Raff. Emergent and predictable memorization in large language models, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11158.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. Piqa: Reasoning about physical
commonsense in natural language. In Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on
code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind
Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Harlan Cleveland. Information as a resource. Futurist, 16(6):34–39, 1982.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert,
Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to
solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168.
William Croft. Typology and universals. Cambridge university press, 2002.
Shizhe Diao, Yu Yang, Yonggan Fu, Xin Dong, Dan Su, Markus Kliegl, Zijia Chen, Peter Belcak, Yoshi
Suhara, Hongxu Yin, et al. Climb: Clustering-based iterative data mixture bootstrapping for language model
pre-training. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2504, 2025.
Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasovi´c, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld, Margaret
Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the colossal clean crawled
corpus, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08758.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration,
2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09751.
Jue Hou, Anisia Katinskaia, Anh-Duc Vu, and Roman Yangarber. Effects of sub-word segmentation on
performance of transformer language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7413–7425, 2023.
Aditi Jha, Sam Havens, Jeremy Dohmann, Alex Trott, and Jacob Portes. Limit: Less is more for instruction
tuning across evaluation paradigms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13133, 2023.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Victoria Johansson. Lexical diversity and lexical density in speech and writing: A developmental perspective.
Working papers/Lund University, Department of Linguistics and Phonetics, 53:61–79, 2008.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly supervised
challenge dataset for reading comprehension, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.03551.
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and Tomas Mikolov. Bag of tricks for efficient text classifica-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759, 2016.
Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Yacine
Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Leandro von Werra, and Harm
de Vries. The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2211.15533.
Julia Kreutzer, Isaac Caswell, Lisa Wang, Ahsan Wahab, Daan van Esch, Nasanbayar Ulzii-Orshikh, Allahsera
Tapo, Nishant Subramani, Artem Sokolov, Claytone Sikasote, Monang Setyawan, Supheakmungkol Sarin,
Sokhar Samb, Benoît Sagot, Clara Rivera, Annette Rios, Isabel Papadimitriou, Salomey Osei, Pedro Ortiz
Suarez, Iroro Orife, Kelechi Ogueji, Andre Niyongabo Rubungo, Toan Q. Nguyen, Mathias Müller, André
Müller, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Nanda Muhammad, Ayanda Mnyakeni, Jamshidbek Mirzakhalov,
Tapiwanashe Matangira, Colin Leong, Nze Lawson, Sneha Kudugunta, Yacine Jernite, Mathias Jenny,
Orhan Firat, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou, Sakhile Dlamini, Nisansa de Silva, Sakine Çabuk Ballı, Stella
Biderman, Alessia Battisti, Ahmed Baruwa, Ankur Bapna, Pallavi Baljekar, Israel Abebe Azime, Ayodele
Awokoya, Duygu Ataman, Orevaoghene Ahia, Oghenefego Ahia, Sweta Agrawal, and Mofetoluwa Adeyemi.
Quality at a glance: An audit of web-crawled multilingual datasets. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 10:50–72, 2022. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00447. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00447.
Hector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgenstern. The winograd schema challenge. In Thirteenth
International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. Citeseer, 2012.
Jeffrey Li, Alex Fang, Georgios Smyrnis, Maor Ivgi, Matt Jordan, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Hritik Bansal, Etash
Guha, Sedrick Scott Keh, Kushal Arora, et al. Datacomp-lm: In search of the next generation of training sets
for language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:14200–14282, 2024a.
Ruihang Li, Yixuan Wei, Miaosen Zhang, Nenghai Yu, Han Hu, and Houwen Peng. Scalingfilter: Assessing
data quality through inverse utilization of scaling laws. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3209–3222, 2024b.
Shayne Longpre, Gregory Yauney, Emily Reif, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Barret Zoph, Denny Zhou, Jason
Wei, Kevin Robinson, David Mimno, et al. A pretrainer’s guide to training data: Measuring the effects of data
age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 3245–3276, 2024.
Max Marion, Ahmet Üstün, Luiza Pozzobon, Alex Wang, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. When less is more:
Investigating data pruning for pretraining llms at scale, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
04564.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct electricity? a
new dataset for open book question answering. In EMNLP, 2018.
Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Hooman Shahrokhi, Oncel Tuzel, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad Farajtabar.
Gsm-symbolic: Understanding the limitations of mathematical reasoning in large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.05229, 2024.
MosaicML. LLM Evaluation Scores, 2023. URL https://www.mosaicml.com/llm-evaluation.
2023a.
Binh-Nguyen Nguyen and Yang He. Swift cross-dataset pruning: Enhancing fine-tuning efficiency in natural
language understanding, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02432.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, Sandro Pezzelle,
Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The lambada dataset: Word prediction requiring a
broad discourse context, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06031.
Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP models really able to solve simple math word
problems? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2080–2094, Online, June 2021. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.168. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2021.naacl-main.168.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding important
examples early in training, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07075.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli, Hamza
Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb dataset for falcon llm:
outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01116, 2023.
Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíˇcek, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin A Raffel, Leandro Von Werra,
Thomas Wolf, et al. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:30811–30849, 2024.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John Aslanides,
Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis &
insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of
machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer, 2023.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D. Manning. Coqa: A conversational question answering challenge,
2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.07042.
Melissa Roemmele, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and Andrew S Gordon. Choice of plausible alternatives: An evaluation
of commonsense causal reasoning. In AAAI spring symposium: logical formalizations of commonsense
reasoning, pp. 90–95, 2011.
Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Wang-Cheng Kang, Jianmo Ni, Lichan Hong, Ed H Chi, James Caverlee,
Julian McAuley, and Derek Zhiyuan Cheng. How to train data-efficient llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09668,
2024.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adversarial
winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106, 2021.
Luca Soldaini and Kyle Lo. peS2o (Pretraining Efficiently on S2ORC) Dataset. https://github.com/
allenai/peS2o, 2023.
Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur, Ben Bogin,
Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Harsh Jha, Sachin Kumar,
Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik,
Crystal Nam, Matthew E. Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell,
Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Pete Walsh, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge, and Kyle Lo. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for
language model pretraining research, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00159.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch, Adam R.
Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska, Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat
Agarwal, and Alethea Power and. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities
of language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04615.
Karin Stromswold. The nature and acquisition of lexical and functional categories. ms., Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, New Jersey, 1994.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten
Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. Neural text
generation with unlikelihood training, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.04319.
Zhaofeng Wu, Linlu Qiu, Alexis Ross, Ekin Akyürek, Boyuan Chen, Bailin Wang, Najoung Kim, Jacob Andreas,
and Yoon Kim. Reasoning or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations of language models through
counterfactual tasks. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1819–1862,
2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy Liang, Quoc V. Le,
Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up language model pretraining,
2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10429.
Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Data selection for language models via
importance resampling, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03169.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine really
finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019.
Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang, Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied, Weizhu Chen,
and Nan Duan. Agieval: A human-centric benchmark for evaluating foundation models, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06364.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
RELATED WORKS
In this section, we first review two streams (e.g., rule-based and model-based) of previous works on
web text data filtering for the pretraining of LLMs. Next, we explain that the baselines employed in
our experimental setup cover all categories of existing baselines. Finally, we provide a more in-depth
explanation of previous methods that share conceptual similarities with our proposed method.
A.1
MAJOR STREAMS OF PRIOR WORK
Rule-based
Raw web-scraped data often contains a substantial amount of low-quality content,
including documents with only space or machine-generated spam (Kreutzer et al., 2022). Because
such noise can be detected with only very simple rules, the earliest filtering methods were rule-based.
Raffel et al. (2020) introduced the following rules, which have subsequently been adopted in a similar
form by most later works (Li et al., 2024a; Penedo et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021;
Bane et al., 2022): (1) Retain lines only with a terminal punctuation mark. (2) Discard pages with
fewer than 3 sentences. (3) Keep lines with at least 5 words. (4) Remove pages with words from the
bad-word list. (5) Removed lines containing the word “Javascript” and “lorem ipsum”.
Because of its simplicity, such heuristic methods often fail to apply fine-grained filtering and risk
discarding semantically valuable content inadvertently (Dodge et al., 2021). Nevertheless, because
rule-based methods are extremely lightweight and require minimal computational resources, they are
commonly applied at the web crawling stage (Bevendorff et al., 2018; Barbaresi, 2021). Consequently,
most web datasets already have such methods applied by default (Penedo et al., 2023; Soldaini et al.,
2024).
Model-based
More sophisticated approaches have been proposed that leverage the capabilities
of deep neural networks (e.g., classifiers), achieving superior performance compared to heuristic
filtering. Such approaches can be categorized into two groups based on whether they require a
manually curated reference dataset.
(1) Without reference: A representative method is computing the perplexity of an LM on the text
and filtering out outliers according to this measure. Another approach employs a linear classification
method based on the embeddings of an LLM (Li et al., 2024a). AskLLM (Sachdeva et al., 2024)
operates by presenting data points to the LLM and utilizing its reasoning capability to judge whether
they constitute noisy data. EL2N (Paul et al., 2023) ranks samples based on the L2 distance between
a model’s prediction and the ground truth, thereby identifying data points that are more important for
learning. Similarly, memorization-based methods (Biderman et al., 2023) assess how well a model
memorizes token sequences within a document. PageRank score is a method of filtering documents
based on how likely they are to be hyperlinked to other documents (Li et al., 2024a). Semantic
Deduplication (semDedup) embeds each point in a dataset, clusters data points together, and removes
data points within clusters that are too similar (Abbas et al., 2023).
(2) With reference: A well-known method is DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b), which constructs embeddings
using either n-grams or FastText embeddings on a curated dataset, and evaluates the similarity of
samples in the raw dataset to these reference embeddings. DSIR is proposed to advance FastText
(Joulin et al., 2016); it trains the model to classify a curated dataset as either high quality or low
quality.
Although model-based methods achieve high performance, they require training time and resources.
In particular, when using LLMs for reasoning or embedding extraction, the process is more time-
consuming, making it difficult to handle large datasets for pretraining. Moreover, when human
curation is involved, performance becomes unstable and dependent on heuristic choices.
A.2
EXPLANATION ON OUR BASELINE SETTINGS
As shown in Table 2, the baselines used in our main experiments include the vanilla Dolma dataset,
FastText, DSIR, and PPL-based filtering. We explain how these methods comprehensively cover the
major streams of baselines described above.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(1) vanilla Dolma (noted as “no-filter” in the paper)
Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024) corpus itself
already incorporates multiple filtering stages—including heuristic filtering, quality filtering, and even
model-based filtering.
• Heuristic rule: adopted from rules used in C4, Gopher.
• Language filter (classifier-based) : Using fastText to select English data.
• Content filter (classifier-based) : Using fastText trained on the Jigsaw Toxic Comment
dataset to filter out toxic documents
• Deduplication (rule-based) : duplication regarding an exact match of URL, document, or
paragraph.
Our method achieves substantial performance gains on top of this. Moreover, these filters are usually
computationally lightweight and are often applied already during the web-crawling stage (Li et al.,
2024a; Soldaini et al., 2024). Therefore, they are compatible with our method by default.
(2) DSIR
DSIR operates on n-gram embedding vectors trained on a curated dataset. This work
(Xie et al., 2023b) also compares a classifier-based embedding option (FastText). So this baseline
covers both n-gram and classifier-based methods.
(3) PPL-based
The (Li et al., 2024a) paper compares a wide range of methods, and demonstrates
that PPL-based approach outperforms well-known model-based methods (AskLLM, classifier on
BGE features, PageRank, SemDedup) and heuristic filters, or is comparable to FastText and top-k
average logits. Therefore, we selected the PPL-based method as the baseline representing other
classifier-based methods.
(4) FastText
To directly compare against classifier-based approaches, we additionally provide the
comparison with FastText (trained under the same dataset as DSIR). Its performance was similar but
slightly lower than DSIR, which is consistent with the findings reported in (Xie et al., 2023b). The
limitations of curation-based methods are also discussed in §A.3.3.
Conclusion
In summary, our experiments cover various types of baselines, including heuristic rule-
based, n-gram-based, and classifier-based methods. In addition, we provide an extra classifier-based
baseline experiment for the sake of clarity.
A.3
METHODS WITH CONCEPTUAL RELATION
A.3.1
DSIR
DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b) assumes that a well-curated reference dataset consisting of high-quality,
well-formed text is available (Wikipedia and Bookcorpus is used in the original work). The method is
to evaluate the similarity of sample d in the raw dataset to this reference corpus, and uses it as the
filtering criterion.
According to Xie et al. (2023b), the process for estimating this similarity proceeds as follows. Given
a corpus D, each document d ∈D is sliced into a sequence of n-grams. For example, if the text
input is “Alice is eating”, it forms the list [Alice, is, eating, Alice is, is eating].
These n-grams are then mapped to hash indices, which are subsequently grouped into m hash buckets
(with m = 10000). The resulting hash frequencies form an m-dimensional categorical distribution
vector γ ∈Rm, referred to as the feature distribution P. Separate feature distributions Praw and
Pref are computed for the reference dataset and the raw dataset, respectively (each denoted as q and
p in the original paper).
From the feature distributions, we can derive feature extractors P(d)as follows:
P(d) =
m
Y
j=1
γ[j]d[j]
(5)
d[j] indicates jth element of the sample d. With this, we can calculate the importance weight for
each data: w(d) = Pref (d)
Praw(d). The final selection is made by retaining those with the highest w(d).
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Comparison with Our Method.
If we set the n-gram size to n = 1 and let the number of hash
buckets m equal the vocabulary size, the DSIR feature distribution P essentially becomes the token
prior used in our work. Moreover, the computation of our µd (the mean log prior of tokens in a
document) is conceptually similar to DSIR’s feature extraction process.
However, our approach differs in several important ways: (1) Unlike DSIR, which requires both the
feature distribution of the raw and the reference dataset, our method relies solely on the raw dataset.
This reduces the dependency and effort for a high-quality refined reference. In practice, obtaining a
truly noise-free dataset is difficult, as corpora like Wikipedia or BookCorpus (used in DSIR) also
have noise. Furthermore, for diverse domains (e.g., GitHub, Chinese corpora), DSIR demands a
separate domain-specific reference corpus, which introduces additional overhead and subjectivity in
selecting appropriate reference data.
(2) DSIR typically uses bigrams (n = 2), while our method is based on unigrams (n = 1). As
a result, function words in DSIR are often tied to neighboring content words and rarely appear
independently in the feature distribution, like in the example [Alice, is, eating, Alice
is, is eating]. Consequently, DSIR’s distribution tends to reflect the frequency of content
words while neglecting the function words. This indicates a difference in the filtering principle from
our approach.
A.3.2
SCDP
SCDP (Swift Cross-Data Pruning) (Nguyen & He, 2025) is a method that selects data based on the
multivariate median of TF-IDF (term frequency and inverse document frequency) representations.
This method selects data that is most similar to the dominant topic frequently covered in the corpus.
To describe the method, first, a feature vector ti = TFi ⊙IDFi is computed for each d ∈D. And
documents that are closest to the median (multivariate median) are selected.
Compared to our approach, SCDP differs in a fundamental way: whereas we compute token priors
based on TF ⊙DF, SCDP uses TF ⊙IDF, which is the inverse way of reflecting DF. Because
tokens with high document frequency receive lower IDF scores, the function words are down-
weighted or often entirely suppressed. As a result, SCDP’s representation captures the frequency of
content words only. This is in contrast to our method, which treats both function and content words
as integral components of a document.
Such an approach leads to the following characteristics: (1) By eliminating the influence of function
words, the method focuses on the composition of content words (i.e., topic), rather than on grammati-
cal regularity. (2) Since selection is based on the median value, it favors documents that are closely
related to one most frequent topic in the corpus.
This approach has a limitation in that the topic of the document does not necessarily correlate with
its noise level. More specifically: (1) A corpus typically contains a diverse range of topics, some of
which may be represented by only a small number of samples. If selection is based on topic similarity,
informative but underrepresented data may be filtered out, even if it is not noisy. (2) Conversely,
documents that align closely with the median topic can contain noise, while still being selected. For
example, as exhibited in Figure 2b, certain web data consists of norm lists or repetitive content that
may appear topically relevant but lack meaningful or well-structured information.
Due to these reasons, we argue that our approach is more optimal for identifying ill-formed, noise-
heavy documents. This is because our method evaluates data based on whether the sentence is
structurally well-formed, regardless of its topic.
A.3.3
FASTTEXT
FastText (Joulin et al., 2016) is a model-based filtering method. To train the model, web-crawled
data are assigned as “low-quality,” while manually curated target data are assigned as “high-quality”.
And the classifier model is trained to infer the probability of a datapoint belonging to a high-quality
set. (Xie et al., 2023b) explains that DSIR is an improved version of FastText, outperforming in
performance. Like DSIR, a key limitation of FastText is that filtering quality is constrained by the
accuracy of manual curation, which also increases rigidity and complexity due to the required human
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
labor. Moreover, because web-crawled data must be additionally tokenized, the computational time
cost increases.
We provide additional analysis on the FastText model in the same setting as DCLM (Li et al., 2024a),
assigning web-crawled data (RefinedWeb (Penedo et al., 2023), which is based on Common Crawl)
as the “low-quality” set, while ELI5 and OH-2.5 as the “high-quality” set.
Case analysis
We analyzed the outlier cases from the FastText classifier and observed several
unexpected patterns. Among the samples classified as having a 0% probability of belonging to
the high-quality set, we observed a substantial number of well-formed texts—particularly those
resembling news articles (Case 1). Conversely, many samples classified as having a 100% probability
of being high-quality were clearly noisy or nonsensical scripts (Case 2). We double-checked our
implementation, but confirmed that these results were solely due to the model’s inference behavior.
Case1. Data assigned a 0% probability of being high-quality (i.e., 100% belonging to RefinedWeb)
— ranking at the absolute bottom of the distribution.
Paula’s Choice – Donating $50,000 to the COVID-19 Solidarity Re-
sponse Fund for World Health Organization.
Pyer Moss – Pyer Moss has set aside $10,000 to get supplies for med-
ical workers while also converting their NYC office into a donation
center to store the supplies.
Using local factories, Pyer Moss is
creating 1,000 mask covers to send directly to front line workers.
With the help of Jen Rubio,
Case2. Data assigned a 100% probability of being high-quality — ranking at the absolute top of the
distribution (1st rank).
'0][1-9]\\|[1][0-2])([0-2][0-9]\\|[3][0-1])\\\\\\\\s\\\\\\\\s
?([0-1]?[0-9]\\|[2][0-3]):[0-5][0-9]:[0-5][0-9])` | | |\n| `
ddMMyy HH:mm:ss` | `(([0-2][0-9]\\|[3][0-1])
([0][1-9]\\|[1][0-2])[0-9]{2}\\\\\\\\s\\\\\\\\s
?([0-1]?[0-9]\\|[2][0-3]):[0-5][0-9]:[0-5][0-9])` | | |\n| `MMM
d HH:mm:ss` | `(Jan\\|Feb\\|Mar\\|Apr\\|May\\|Jun\\|Jul\\|Aug\\|
Sep\\|Oct\\|Nov\\|Dec)\\\\\\\\s\\\\\\\\s?([0]?[1-
We hypothesize the following reasons for this unpreferred behavior:
(1) RefinedWeb contains a substantial amount of well formed data.
To avoid the cost of human
labeling, DCLM chose to label RefinedWeb (Penedo et al., 2023) as the low-quality set, while
labeling OH-2.5 and ELI5 as the high-quality set. During inference, the model predicts the probability
(0 100%) that a given text belongs to the high-quality set. However, RefinedWeb also contains a
considerable proportion of well-formed documents. As a result, many samples that FastText classifies
with 0% probability of belonging to the high-quality set are in fact well-formed and informative texts
(Case1), often resembling those found in RefinedWeb.
One possible explanation is that news article–style texts are prevalent in web-crawled sources (e.g.,
RefinedWeb), but largely absent from curated datasets like OH-2.5 and ELI5, which mainly contain
question-answering format. As a result, the FastText model may have implicitly learned to classify
the news article (or other non-QA-style) format as belonging to low-quality set, leading to systematic
misclassification.
(2) Limited discrimination capacity.
Another possible explanation is the prevalence of code and
math-related content in OH-2.5. Since such sources are relatively less common in RefinedWeb, the
model may have overfit to these symbolic patterns during training. However, due to the limited
capacity of the small FastText model, it is unable to capture deeper coherence within symbolic
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
language. As a result, it may incorrectly classify meaningless noise that superficially resembles
symbolic content (as in Case 2) as belonging to the high-quality set with 100% probability.
These results underscore the weaknesses of model-based methods, supporting the robustness of
prior-based approach.
B
THEORETICAL DERIVATION AND BOUNDARY CONDITION ANALYSIS
In this section, we show that (1) under the linguistic observation presented in §2.2, the prior-based
metric shares noise-distinguishing behavior with PPL, regardless of the scale of the model or corpus.
In particular, (2) we demonstrate that the distance from the central point is a distinguisher of outliers.
(3) We also explain the boundary conditions under which this property does not hold.
B.1
THEORETICAL GUARANTEE OF NOISE DETECTION BEHAVIOR
B.1.1
THE COMPONENTS OF PPL AND THE APPROXIMATION VIA PRIOR-BASED METRIC
As is well known, PPL consists of the following two components: the likelihood and the prior term.
log PPL(d) ∝P
i log p(x<i|xi) + P
i log p(xi)
And in §3.2, we introduced two prior-based metrics:
(1) µd ∝P
i log p(xi)
(2) σd = std[p(xi)] ∝P
i[p(xi) −ed]2, ed = E[p(xj)]
Prior term of PPL
As can be seen, the µd is identical to the prior term of PPL. Therefore, the
prior-based filter partially approximates PPL.
Likelihood term of PPL
The σd and likelihood share a similarity in that they reflect relationships
among tokens rather than averaging the independent properties of individual tokens. However, it is
difficult to formally prove a universal connection.
However, under the following assumptions and scenarios, they exhibit similar behavior in filtering
noisy data.
Assumptions:
We assume very simplified settings of linguistic observation in §2.2.
(1) Suppose tokens consist of only two categories, F and C, where F represents function words and C
represents content words. (2) Within any well-formed document, these two groups must follow a
fixed ratio r∗(e.g., F:C=4:1).
(3) Actually, data d has a fixed length (e.g., 5), and has an observed ratio r. And r has only two
possible values: r∗(well-formed) or ˆr (noise).
Example of r∗: FFFCF, FFCFF
Example of ˆr : FFFFF, FFCCF
(4) If the data of r∗takes the big proportion in the corpus, both the empirical average of ratio and the
trained model p converge near to r∗.
(1)–(3) are simplified versions of the linguistic observation in §2.2, and (4) represents the minimal
condition required for our method to operate. (Experiment in §3.4.2 shows the minimal proportion is
around 10
Property of conditional likelihood
In this simplified setting, conditional likelihood is determined
solely by r (e.g., p(else | C) ≪p(FFFF | C) ≈1 ).
Therefore, the distribution of ld = P
i log p(x̸=i|xi) places data with r* near to 1, while placing ˆr
near the left tail. And since r∗dominates the corpus (assumption 4), the overall distribution of ld
becomes right-skewed.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Therefore, in the distribution of ld, data with ratio ˆr can be identified through the left tails that deviate
far from the representative value (e.g., median) of the distribution.
Property of σd
For the σd, the computation is straightforward. Given a fixed occurrence prob-
abilities (e.g., p(C) = 1/5 and p(F) = 4/5), the σd are distributed around specific value (e.g.,
E[σd] = 0.26) where the ratio of data is r∗. And the samples that deviate far from this point can be
distinguished as the one with ˆr.
Therefore, both the likelihood term and the σd exhibit similar behavior in identifying ˆr.
Property of µd
Under the FC assumption, we further explain the role of the prior term of PPL
(µd) in distinguishing ˆr. Suppose that F and C have fixed occurrence probabilities (e.g., p(F) =
4/5, p(C) = 1/5) and appear within each document according to those probabilities. Then, we can
observe that the average of their occurrence probabilities tends to concentrate around a specific value
(e.g., E(µd) = 0.68).
If the observed ratio deviates from this central value, it will move further away from the central value,
allowing us to identify ˆr accordingly.
In conclusion, under assumptions 1–4, we can guarantee two properties of prior-based metrics.
(1) the prior-based metrics (µd, σd) align with all components of PPL in identifying ˆr. So, we can
say the prior-based filter “weakly aligns” with PPL-based filter. (2) the prior-based metric of normal
data with valid structures (r∗) converges around a single central point, allowing outliers (ˆr) to be
distinguished by their distance from this center.
B.1.2
DISCREPANCY FROM THEORETICAL GUARANTEE: BOUNDARY CONDITION ANALYSIS
However, such an approximation required simplified assumptions. Consequently, when these as-
sumptions are violated in a real-world data, a discrepancy arises. The most significant violation case
we can identify is the following: even when a document follows the ratio r∗, it may still contain no
meaningful information. This corresponds to cases such as:
(1) Text with an appropriate balance (r∗) of function and content words, yet are semantically
nonsensical. This case is illustrated with Figure 3(a). (2) The data are not noise, nor semantically
nonsensical; rather, they are either too difficult or too trivial to be useful for the model. (In this
scenario, the main LLM should compute PPL directly, so this case is not applicable to our PPL
baseline either.)
In such cases, PPL will play a clearer role, and the prior-based filter will not be able to handle this,
and we do not claim this. Prior filter is designed to identify only the noisy data (ˆr), as we emphasized
in the title and §1.
However, we claim the following: (1) The prior can at least provide a clearer signal in identifying ˆr,
as model-predicted likelihood can often be unreliable. (2) In the corpus with a very high proportion
of noise (e.g., web crawled corpus), identifying ˆr may be more impactful than deliberate reordering
among r∗data. (3) Still, compatible with PPL-based filter.
B.2
ROBUSTNESS JUSTIFICATION FOR MEDIAN-BASED THRESHOLDING
By drawing on the above theoretical arguments, we can justify the robustness of our methodological
choices of a median-based threshold. For example, this allows us to answer the question of whether the
median-based threshold remains effective when the corpus exhibits a mixed multimodal distribution.
B.2.1
MIXED MULTIMODAL DISTRIBUTIONS
(1) Prior-based filter only measures the grammatical structure via the function-content word ratio.
And texts in one specific language tend to share the same grammatical structure, regardless of their
style or domain (e.g., news, forum). Thus, prior-filter will generalize to each other.
Dolma is such an example. Although Dolma consists of various types of data (e.g., news, books,
symbolic scripts), our method has been shown to perform well across these domains.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(2) Std metric (σd) measures the distance between token priors, thus the distance itself may not vary
much among other types of language.
Let’s bring the “FC” assumption from §B.1 to here. Let’s assume there are heterogeneous language
groups A and B, and each has its function-content words pair, and each group follows the assumption
of §B.1. {F, C} ∈A, {R, T} ∈B.
According to the linguistic axiom, we can assume that distinct linguistic system (A, B) shares a
similar function-content ratio (e.g., 1:4). Therefore, the central value of std metric for both languages
is the same (e.g., E[σA] = E[σB] = 0.26). Thus, σd for A and B share the same central value, even
though they are heterogeneous.
(3) However, in practice, if the amount of B is significantly smaller than A, then there can be an imbal-
ance of the function-content ratio. For example, p(F) = 0.4, p(C) = 0.1, p(R) = 0.0004, p(T) =
0.0001. In this case, the central value of the distribution of σA and σB will diverge. We suggest two
points:
(3-1) We tested an extreme case of this in §3.4.2 with the Chinese-English set, to answer the question
“When two entirely different languages are mixed together, to what extent can a single median
encompass both languages?” Our experiments indicate that if a minority group is mixed only over
10%, most of the minority language is still considered an inlier when using a single median.
(3-2) If this is still insufficient, we can compute the token prior by mixing in a corpus that shares
attributes with the target corpus. For example, if we mix in more data that resembles corpus B and
then recalculate the token prior, we might obtain token priors such as p(F) = 0.4, p(C) = 0.1,
p(R) = 0.4, and p(C) = 0.1. In this case, we can bring corpora A and B to the same median value
again, even though the actual proportion of B is very small.
This approach corresponds to the method described in §D.1(2) of our paper. For example, when we
compute the token prior using a setting where GitHub data are added to Dolma, the resulting token
prior enables better identification of GitHub-like data (e.g., symbolic scripts) within Dolma.
C
GENERALIZATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES AND TOKENIZERS
In this section, we discuss how our method generalizes to languages beyond English and to tokenizers
other than the GPT-2 tokenizer.
As we discussed in §B, our method is supposed to work with any language system following two
features (1) the language is composed of function words and content words, (2) function and content
words have distinct distribution of frequency. This character applies to most natural languages (e.g.,
Chinese, Japanese, Turkish).
Most languages are composed of function-content words
It is well observed in linguistics
(Stromswold, 1994; Croft, 2002) that no matter how compound a language is, it can be separated into
function morphemes and content morphemes.
For instance, the Turkish compounding word evlerimizden (‘from our homes’) decomposes into ev
(content morpheme) + ler + imiz + den (grammatical morphemes).
These function and content words follow the frequency rule (i.e., function words tend to have higher
frequency). For example, in Turkish, the function word “ler” appears across many different nouns
(e.g., evler, ¸sehirler, ö˘grenciler ), resulting in higher term frequency.
The same phenomenon occurs even when dealing with English. For example, a compound word such
as childish is typically segmented into child and -ish. The suffix -ish appears across many different
content words, and thus behaves similarly to a high-frequency function morpheme.
The tokenizers split words into morphemes based on frequency
Most tokenizers (e.g., BPE,
WordPiece, SentencePiece) have tendency to merge characters with high co-occurrence probability
into a single token (e.g., “i” + “n” →“in”). This is because most tokenizers, either directly or
approximately, follow the Minimum Description Length (MDL) (Hou et al., 2023) objective, which
aims to minimize both the vocabulary size and the length of representation. For example, the token
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
“ler” frequently co-occurs with various words, so assigning it as an independent token is more efficient
(i.e., covering a wider range of expression with limited vocab) than assigning “¸sehirler” and “evler”
as separate tokens.
Combining together, most of natural languages can be segmented into function and content compo-
nents, and most tokenizers effectively reflect this distinction, even in morphologically compounding
languages.
C.1
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Table 4: Same setting as Figure 5. Pro-
portion of Turkish data classified as
outliers after mixing Turkish and En-
glish data at a ratio of a : 100. Outliers
correspond to the top and bottom 5%
of µd.
Size of Turkish data (a)
Outliers (10%)
1
0.5036
5
0.2778
10
0.2448
20
0.1984
100
0.1337
Other
languages
The
Chinese–English
experiment
(§3.4.2) provides evidence for generalization to other
languages, such as Chinese.
Suppose that the prior-based filter works only for English
but not for Chinese, then our filter will classify all Chinese
data as noise. Then, in Figure 5, at the point where Chinese
and English are mixed at a 10:100 ratio (at any ratio), nearly
100% of the Chinese data should be classified as outliers.
However, the actual results show that most of the Chinese
data were classified as inliers, only if this language group
takes more than 10% of the corpus. Therefore, the prior-
based filter works for Chinese as well.
We also conducted the same experiment on Turkish (Table 4). And the results were consistent with
those of the Chinese–English experiment. We provide an explanation below.
Other tokenizers
We provide comparison with two additional tokenizers: LLaMA-3-8B (UTF-8-
based, vocab size 128K), and T5-small (SentencePiece-based, vocab size 32K), in Table 5. GPT-2
tokenizer (mainly used in our paper, 50K) has a vocab size of 50K. All of these tokenizers tend to
assign function morphemes as individual tokens in accordance with the MDL principle. However, we
measure the performance differences among different granularities.
Table 5: Performance of large (1.5B) models
on Dolma under different tokenizers. Avg: Avg
normalized accuracy, W: World knowledge, C:
Commonsense reasoning, L: Language under-
standing, S: Symbolic problem solving, R: Read-
ing comprehension
Tokenizer
Avg
W
C
L
S
R
GPT2
9.20
9.53
11.27
10.31
11.13
3.79
LLaMA-3
9.39
9.54
11.16
10.78
11.86
3.64
T5-small
8.11
8.59
7.43
7.95
12.32
4.22
The result is reported in ETable 4 (also Table 4
of our paper). All tokenizers showed the advan-
tage of filtering, while T5 exhibited slightly lower
performance gain. We propose two possible in-
terpretations: (1) There may exist a threshold of
optimal granularity, which lies between 32K and
50K. (2) Using the tokenizer paired with the model
may offer stability.
Nevertheless, as demonstrated, priors can be com-
puted even with tokenizers mismatched to the
model. If an optimal tokenizer exists, it can be
freely adopted at any time.
C.2
SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE
Symbolic languages (e.g., codes) are a more worrisome case, as they are more different from English,
and it has not been verified whether linguistic observation of natural language applies to them.
Therefore, we conducted experiments on this extreme case (§4.2), and empirically proved our method
still generalizes to symbolic language as well. We can expect that it will generalize to other natural
languages more similar to English.
D
PRESERVING MINORITY DATA
As data filtering removes noisy data, which is often found in outliers, it inherently risks discarding
valuable minority data (e.g., a highly technical paper with rare terminology, a corpus including
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
minority languages) as a trade-off. Minimizing this trade-off is the general goal of research on
filtering. In this section, we discuss our prior-based filtering method from the view of this trade-off.
This trade-off can be measured through Dolma
In our experiments on Dolma, we also observe
such a trade-off. As shown in Table 1, Dolma consists primarily of English-based web data, with
a small portion of programming language data (The Stack), and understanding this language is
separately measured through “symbolic problem-solving” in Table 2.
Prior-based filter shows a better trade-off
Table 2 shows that the no-filter setting achieves the
highest symbolic understanding, while the PPL-based filter shows very low symbolic understanding,
even with the improved overall score. This clearly illustrates the trade-off: as filtering is applied,
minority languages are pruned away. In contrast, the prior-based filter shows much higher symbolic
performance compared to the PPL-based filter, while also maintaining a higher overall score. This
indicates a significantly better trade-off of our method. We provide additional evidence in §D.2.
Nevertheless, we propose additional approaches to further address this trade-off.
D.1
ADDITIONAL METHODS TO ADDRESS TRADE-OFF
(1) Using only stds:
Our original method leverages both the mean and standard deviations (stds) of
the prior. Using only the stds may be beneficial, since the mean reflects the average frequency of
tokens, whereas the std captures the dynamics among them. This distinction can make stds-based
filtering more effective in identifying well-structured documents with low-frequency languages. In
Table 6, the filter with stds as criterion achieves higher symbolic understanding than the mean+stds
filter, while maintaining comparable average accuracy.
(2) Calculate prior on blended corpus:
Another approach is to incorporate target-domain data
when estimating token frequencies, thereby assigning higher prior probabilities to domain-specific
terms and preventing their exclusion during filtering. In practice, we mixed Pile-GitHub data with
Dolma in equal proportion for prior computation, which needed only an additional 10 minutes of
processing. As a result, overall performance improved beyond the original method, while symbolic
task performance also increased (“Dolma + Github” among Source column in Table 6).
Table 6: Performance among baselines pre-trained on Dolma.
Criteria
Source
Average
normalized
accuracy
World
knowledge
Commonsense
reasoning
Language
understanding
Symbolic
problem
solving
Reading
compre-
hension
Large (1.5B) model
prior-based
mean
Dolma
8.50
9.12
10.25
7.45
11.38
4.28
"
stds
"
8.70
7.28
10.57
9.34
12.40
3.89
"
mean + stds
"
9.20
9.53
11.27
10.31
11.13
3.79
"
"
Dolma + Github
9.48
11.47
10.83
8.97
12.22
3.78
D.2
ASSESSING DATA LOSS OF PRIOR-BASED FILTER IN CONTROLLED SETTING
Table 7: n is the number of
injected terminology, and in-
liers is the rate of texts re-
maining in 25% 75% bound-
ary.
n
n× token length
inliers (25% - 75%)
1
2
1.0
6
12
1.0
7
14
0.98
8
16
0.91
9
18
0.67
There can be a worry that a highly technical paper with rare termi-
nology or a poem with unusual syntax could be incorrectly filtered.
We aim to validate this scenario in a controlled setting. We first con-
sider a scenario where a document with a general structure contains
extremely rare terminology. To simulate this, we sampled 1,000 data
points (each 512-token length) from the Dolma dataset within the
central ±15% range of µ and gradually injected rare terms into them.
Rare terminology was generated by concatenating two tokens ranked
in the bottom 10% of the prior distribution (e.g., “prosecromeda”,
combining two tokens “prosec” and “romeda”). We inserted n of
these terms into each text and measured the percentage of these texts
classified as outliers ( ±25% threshold). The result is presented in Table 7. Up to seven insertions of
rare terms—amounting to 14 tokens (2.7%) within a 512-token block—were required before around
10% of texts were filtered out.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
To assess whether seven occurrences are a reasonable upper bound, we examined the typical frequency
of topic-specific terminology in real-world text. Specifically, we sampled 10,000 Wikipedia articles,
segmented them into 512-token blocks, normalized all text to lowercase, and counted the occurrences
of the article title within each block. On average, the title appeared 1.09 times per block, corresponding
to an average token length of 3.44. This suggests that even documents intended to explain a given
concept are far from being dominated by that terminology. Taken together, these findings indicate that
the prior-based filter exhibits strong robustness when handling scenarios involving rare terminology.
E
ADDITIONAL ANALYSIS
E.1
SENSITIVITY
Table 8: Overlaps of outliers
between dataset with differ-
ent block size.
n = 1024
n = 2048
e = 5
0.7935
0.6954
e = 10
0.8145
0.7263
e = 20
0.8102
0.7265
Sensitivity to block size
We conduct the following analysis to
assess whether outliers remain consistently detected across different
block sizes. We randomly concatenated two 512-token blocks to make
1024-token blocks, then trimmed e/2% from each side to identify
outlier samples: x1024i = x5122i ⊕x512
2i+1, where i denotes the data
index in the corpus X, and xn represents a text block of size n, with
x512 ∈X512.
If a sample x512
i
is classified as a e% outlier, we then check whether the concatenated block x1024
i//2 is
also classified as an outlier. We repeat the same comparison for x2048. As shown in Table 8, outliers
of smaller blocks were largely retained as outliers in larger blocks, indicating strong alignment.
However, the overlap diminishes as n grows. This is because if a page contains both noisy and (more
or equal proportion of) clean content, discarding the entire page may not always be ideal.
Sensitivity to threshold
Regarding the threshold ratio of outliers, we follow the optimal threshold
of the PPL-based filter. Ankner et al. (2024) extensively evaluated PPL-based filtering across different
selection rates (25%, 50%, 75%) and concluded that 50% was the most effective. Nevertheless, we
explore an additional approach for verification (“elbow” in Table 9). As illustrated in Figure 2, we
normalize µ, σ, rank to a 0 −1 scale, and define boundaries where the gradient crosses −1 (on both
sides), resulting in an 82% threshold of the data. However, the overall performance was lower than
the 50% threshold. We also present an experiment with a threshold of 25%, which also showed
clearly lower performance. These observations were consistent with the observation of Ankner et al.
(2024).
Table 9: Performance of large (1.5B) models on Dolma, under different threshold settings.
Threshold
Average
normalized
accuracy
World
knowledge
Commonsense
reasoning
Language
understanding
Symbolic
problem
solving
Reading
compre-
hension
25%
6.21
7.03
7.06
5.99
7.36
3.57
50%
9.20
9.53
11.27
10.31
11.13
3.79
81% (elbow)
8.79
10.04
7.67
8.97
13.04
4.21
E.2
CORRELATION BETWEEN PRIOR AND PPL
We present an additional analysis illustrating the correlation between the prior and PPL. Our hypothe-
sis is that this correlation would be more pronounced among outliers, as inlier data exhibit very low
variance, making rankings fluctuate easily.
Table 10: 1000 samples from the top, middle, and
bottom ranks.
E(PPL)
E(PPL∗) trimmed
abs(E(PPL∗) −M(PPL))
e = 5
1.5
1.4
33.1
e = 10
460.2
34.7
0.1
e = 20
4701.9
9.0
25.6
To examine this, we selected the top, middle, and
bottom 1k samples based on µ and computed
their average PPL (E(PPL), see Table 10).
While the results initially appear to show a
highly linear correlation, this is largely driven
by extreme outliers within each subset. To miti-
gate this effect, we recalculated the average after
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
trimming the top and bottom five samples from each subset ( E(PPL∗) ), and then measured the
1-norm difference from the median PPL: |E(PPL∗) −M(PPL)|.
The results reveal that subsets centered on µ correspond to median PPL values, whereas subsets
with extreme µ values (top and bottom) exhibit PPL averages that are substantially distant from the
median. This indicates that prior-based rankings effectively identify segments of the data that deviate
from the central distribution under PPL.
F
DETAILS ON EXPERIMENTS
F.1
SCORES FOR EACH BENCHMARK
Table 11: Benchmark performance of large (1.5B) models.
Model
World knowledge
Commonsense reasoning
Language understanding
ARC easy
BIG-bench
wikidata
TriviaQA
COPA
OBQA
PIQA
HellaSwag
LAMBADA
Winograd
Winogrande
no-filter
8.25
2.81
0.40
0.31
-4.00
15.34
1.30
6.68
12.82
3.71
DSIR
9.65
4.42
0.47
1.47
0.53
16.00
2.70
13.43
13.55
-0.71
PPL-based
11.79
8.19
0.87
2.34
0.27
19.48
4.11
16.85
9.89
-1.18
Prior-based (ours)
12.29
6.78
1.27
1.38
-0.53
20.35
5.84
18.46
14.29
2.45
Model
Symbolic problem solving
Reading comprehension
BIG-bench
algorithms
BIG-bench
dyck lan-
guages
BIG-bench
elementary
math QA
BIG-bench
operators
GSM8K
SVAMP
LSAT-LR
LSAT-RC
SAT-English
CoQA
no-filter
37.12
13.00
2.21
7.14
0.00
6.67
3.79
3.48
6.80
0.31
DSIR
39.92
13.70
2.70
5.71
0.15
1.33
3.79
4.48
6.15
1.47
PPL-based
25.23
0.60
3.27
7.14
0.68
3.33
3.53
4.48
5.50
2.34
Prior-based (ours)
33.03
11.50
3.75
5.71
0.23
1.67
3.01
3.98
6.80
1.38
Table 11 reports the performance of large (1.5B) models on Dolma across different filtering methods.
As discussed above, the prior-based generally outperforms other baselines or performs comparably
to the best baselines.
F.2
JUSTIFICATION OF EXPERIMENT SCALE
F.2.1
REGARDING TRAINING TOKEN DURATION
To ensure experimental rigor despite our resource constraints, we followed the experimental setup
of a representative paper that we conceptually inherit Ankner et al. (2024). According to this study,
the performance gap between baselines is established in the early phases of training. Ankner et al.
(2024) reports downstream task performance up to 25 or 50B token duration, and it shows that
the performance gaps between baselines observed at 5B token duration remain largely consistent
throughout the last stage (Figure 1 of Ankner et al. (2024)). Our work leverages this observation, and
this also aligns with our experiment in Figure 7.
Particularly in Ankner et al. (2024), all models are trained with 2× data repetition, and the 5B-token
duration in Figure 1 of Ankner et al. (2024) corresponds to 2.5B tokens of data repeated twice. Our
experimental setup also uses 3B tokens repeated twice (total 6B), which makes it directly comparable
to the 5B-token point in Figure 1 of Ankner et al. (2024).
These trends are consistently observed in other works. li2024datacomp also demonstrates that the
ranking of model performance is largely determined early in training and remains consistent. In
addition, Figure 1 of diao2025climb clearly shows that the initial performance gaps are established in
the early phases.
F.2.2
REGARDING THE MODEL SIZE
Many representative works on data filtering employ relatively small models around 1.5B parameters,
assuming that such a scale is sufficient for reliable evaluation. For example, Ankner et al. (2024)
uses 1B and 2B models, while Diao et al. (2025) employs 350M and 1B models. In addition, recent
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
representative works in this topic (Li et al., 2024b; Penedo et al., 2024; Longpre et al., 2024; Xie et al.,
2023b) all conduct experiments with models smaller than 2B. This contrasts with studies focusing
on model architectures (e.g., LLaMA, DeepSeek) that compete in complex reasoning performance,
which typically require pretraining of large-scale models (e.g., 7B and 70B). A detailed rationale of
why small model settings can still maintain experimental rigor in data filtering, is provided below.
F.3
INDIRECT EVALUATION ON THE COMPLEX REASONING TASK
Certain abilities, like complex reasoning skills, may exhibit emergence in the later stages of training
or in larger models. This may be why the reviewers expect experiments at a larger scale. We will
provide an explanation and an indirect evaluation regarding this.
F.3.1
JUSTIFICATION
Our method is designed to filter noisy text data, which consists of broken sentence structures. If
we can assume noise as "data that contains no interpretable information", then learning such data
does not contribute to the emergence of complex reasoning. This is because the emergence of
complex intelligence arises from the integration of information within the model (Cleveland, 1982),
but noise contains no information to contribute to this process. See noise cases filtered by prior-filter
in Appendix F; they will remain useless no matter how much the model learns it or how large model
learns it.
If we can assume that learning more information (i.e., from corpora with less noise) leads to better
complex reasoning skills, the amount of learned information can be evaluated at a smaller scale and
with more straightforward benchmarks, which are sufficiently covered in our experiments.
F.3.2
INDIRECT EVALUATION
Recently, some research views that reasoning skill is learned directly from the dataset as a part
of pattern memorization, rather than emerging as a mere intellectual invention (Wu et al., 2024;
Mirzadeh et al., 2024). From this view, if the training dataset contains more data that is similar to the
targeted complex task benchmark, the model’s performance on that target benchmark would increase
accordingly. This is because the model can utilize a larger number of direct templates to solve the
task, in a manner of pattern memorization.
From this concept, we mixed the targeted benchmark dataset (e.g., MMLU-pro) into the Dolma
corpus and measured how much of this benchmark data is maintained through each filtering method.
This simulates a scenario where the training dataset contains data similar to the target benchmark.
Therefore, if more benchmark data remain after filtering, we can assume there are higher likelihood
that such data (i.e., similar to the targeted benchmark) is preserved in a larger-scale setting, leading to
better benchmark performance. Although we can not directly evaluate MMLU-pro performance with
a small LM (usually under 7B), this may offer an indirect way to estimate the potential impact of
filters on complex task-solving capability.
Table 12: The remaining portion of the MMLU-Pro dataset
for each filtering method and threshold.
Threshold (<)
±0.2
±0.25
±0.3
±0.4
±0.45
PPL-based
0.222
0.292
0.436
0.740
0.987
Prior-based
0.510
0.629
0.743
0.931
0.990
Random
0.400
0.500
0.600
0.800
0.900
As a result, we find that the prior-
based filter achieves significantly
better recognition performance on
MMLU-Pro data compared to PPL
and random selection. Based on this
observation, it is difficult to argue that
a model trained with PPL-based filter
would achieve a better score than a
prior-based filter on MMLU-Pro.
We analyze that this might be due to our method’s better preservation of “rare but valuable data,” as
discussed in Appendix B.1. MMLU-Pro is known to contain a lot of logical statements, which likely
constitute only a small portion of web corpora (e.g., Dolma). As prior-filter is more sensitive to the
rare group (§D), it might have a higher chance of capturing such data.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
G
DETAILS ON BENCHMARKS
Jha et al. (2023) also use the MosaicML evaluation gauntlet to perform evaluations in their work. As
such, with explicit permission from the authors, we reproduce their text describing the tasks and task
categories in the evaluation gauntlet. The following is from Section D of their paper:
The World Knowledge category includes the following datasets:
• ARC easy: 2,376 easy four-choice multiple choice science questions drawn from grade 3-9
science exams. (Clark et al., 2018)
• BIG-bench wikidata:
20,321 questions regarding factual information pulled from
Wikipedia. (Srivastava et al., 2023)
• TriviaQA: 3,000 question-answering dataset; clipped all answers to be at most 10 tokens
long to improve speed. (Joshi et al., 2017)
The Commonsense Reasoning category loosely assesses a model’s ability to do basic reasoning
tasks that require commonsense knowledge of objects, their properties and their behavior. It includes
the following datasets:
• COPA: 100 cause/effect multiple choice questions. (Roemmele et al., 2011)
• OBQA (OpenBook QA): 500 four-choice multiple choice questions that rely on basic
physical and scientific intuition about common objects and entities. (Mihaylov et al., 2018)
• PIQA: 1,838 commonsense physical intuition 2-choice multiple choice questions. (Bisk
et al., 2020)
Language Understanding tasks evaluate the model’s ability to understand the structure and properties
of languages and include the following datasets:
• HellaSwag: 10,042 multiple choice scenarios in which the model is prompted with a scenario
and choose the most likely conclusion to the scenario from four possible options. (Zellers
et al., 2019)
• LAMBADA: 6,153 passages take from books - we use the formatting adopted by OpenAI’s
version. (Paperno et al., 2016)
• Winograd Schema Challenge: 273 scenarios in which the model must use semantics to
correctly resolve the anaphora in a sentence. (Levesque et al., 2012)
• Winogrande: 1,267 scenarios in which two possible beginnings of a sentence are presented
along with a single ending. (Sakaguchi et al., 2021)
Symbolic problem solving tasks test the model’s ability to solve a diverse range of symbolic tasks
including arithmetic, logical reasoning, algorithms and algebra. These datasets include:
• BIG-bench algorithms: 1,320 multiple choice questions. (Srivastava et al., 2023)
• BIG-bench dyck languages: 1000 complete-the-sequence questions. (Srivastava et al.,
2023)
• BIG-bench elementary math QA: 38,160 four-choice multiple choice arithmetic word
problems. (Srivastava et al., 2023)
• BIG-bench operators: 210 questions involving mathematical operators. (Srivastava et al.,
2023)
• GSM8K: 1,319 short, free-response grade school-level arithmetic word problems with
simple numerical solutions. (Cobbe et al., 2021)
• SVAMP: 300 short, free-response grade school-level arithmetic word problems with simple
numerical solutions. (Patel et al., 2021)
The Reading comprehension benchmarks test a model’s ability to answer questions based on the
information in a passage of text. The datasets include:
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• LSAT-LR: 510 passage-based four choice multiple choice questions. (Zhong et al., 2023)
• LSAT-RC: 268 passage-based four choice multiple choice questions. (Zhong et al., 2023)
• SAT-English: 206 passage-based four choice multiple choice questions. (Zhong et al., 2023)
• CoQA: 7,983 passage-based short free response questions. (Reddy et al., 2019)
H
USAGE OF AI ASSISTANTS
In preparing this manuscript, we relied on AI-powered writing tools to refine sentence flow, fix
grammatical mistakes, and improve readability. These assistants were used strictly for language
polishing and played no role in shaping the technical content, research design, or experimental
work. All scientific concepts, findings, and conclusions presented in this paper were fully developed
and written by the researchers. The involvement of AI was limited to editorial support and did not
influence the originality or intellectual contributions of the study.
I
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Within the abstract, we included a URL to an anonymous GitHub repository where our code is made
available. This repository not only contains the full implementation but also offers detailed guidelines
for installation, along with step-by-step instructions on how to perform both training and testing.
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J
FILTERED CASES
In this section, we provide more cases that are classified as extreme outliers by the prior-based criteria.
J.1
PRIOR STDS(σd ) BASED
Figure 8: Bottom-n ranked data based on prior stds (σd).
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 9: Top-n ranked data based on prior stds (σd). For the top 1–5 examples, the whitespace
contains special characters other than “/s”.
d
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J.2
PRIOR MEAN(µd )-BASED
Figure 10: Bottom-n ranked data based on prior mean (µd).
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 11: Top-n ranked data based on prior mean (µd).
32