--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
DIFFINK: GLYPH- AND STYLE-AWARE
LATENT DIFFUSION TRANSFORMER
FOR TEXT TO ONLINE HANDWRITING GENERATION
Wei Pan,
Huiguo He∗,
Hiuyi Cheng,
Yilin Shi,
Lianwen Jin∗
South China University of Technology
eewpan@mail.scut.edu.cn, {hehuiguo, eelwjin}@scut.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Deep generative models have advanced text-to-online handwriting generation
(TOHG), which aims to synthesize realistic pen trajectories conditioned on tex-
tual input and style references. However, most existing methods still primarily
focus on character- or word-level generation, resulting in inefficiency and a lack
of holistic structural modeling when applied to full text lines. To address these
issues, we propose DiffInk, the first latent diffusion Transformer framework for
full-line handwriting generation. We first introduce InkVAE, a novel sequential
variational autoencoder enhanced with two complementary latent-space regular-
ization losses: (1) an OCR-based loss enforcing glyph-level accuracy, and (2) a
style-classification loss preserving writing style. This dual regularization yields
a semantically structured latent space where character content and writer styles
are effectively disentangled. We then introduce InkDiT, a novel latent diffusion
Transformer that integrates target text and reference styles to generate coherent
pen trajectories. Experimental results demonstrate that DiffInk outperforms ex-
isting state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in both glyph accuracy and style fidelity,
while significantly improving generation efficiency.
DiffInk
(Ours)
Generated Online Handwriting
Style Reference  
Full-line Text Input : 五岳寻仙不辞远，一生好入名山游。庐山秀出南斗傍，屏风九叠云锦张。
𝑺𝟐
𝑺𝟑
𝑮𝟐
𝑮𝟑
𝑺𝟏
𝑮𝟏
𝑻
Figure 1: Overview of DiffInk. By directly modeling entire text lines rather than individual char-
acters, the model efficiently synthesizes online handwritten text lines (Gi) conditioned on textual
input (T) and style references (Si), achieving accurate content reproduction and consistent style in
both character form and layout structure. Different colors represent distinct handwriting styles.
1
INTRODUCTION
As shown in Figure 1, TOHG refers to the task of synthesizing realistic pen trajectories conditioned
on textual content and style references. It has a wide range of applications, including personalized
digital ink rendering, handwriting simulation, and data augmentation for optical character recog-
nition (OCR). However, TOHG presents unique challenges: beyond character-level generation, it
requires coherent inter-character modeling and line-level layout; Compared to image-based meth-
ods, it needs to handle temporal dynamics while maintaining glyph fidelity and stylistic consistency.
In recent years, TOHG has attracted growing research interest. Early methods (Graves, 2013; Li
et al., 2024) adopt Auto-Regressive (AR) modeling to generate trajectory points sequentially. Sub-
sequent approaches attempt to control style through content-style disentanglement, utilizing either
1) coarse-grained global style representations such as writer IDs (Luo et al., 2022) or 2) fine-grained
local style representations such as character components (Liu et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2023). Notably,
∗Corresponding authors. Code available at https://github.com/awei669/DiffInk.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(b) Character-level t-SNE visualization
Vanilla VAE
(a) Writer-style t-SNE visualization
InkVAE (Ours)
Vanilla VAE
InkVAE (Ours)
Figure 2: Latent-space visualization of Vanilla VAE vs. InkVAE (ours). While both mod-
els achieve good reconstruction, InkVAE learns a more structured latent space (visualized with t-
SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008)): (a) Text-line features from 8 writers—InkVAE exhibits clearer
writer-specific clusters. (b) Character-level features from 8 common characters—InkVAE yields
tighter intra-class groupings and more distinct inter-class separation.
OLHWG (Ren et al., 2025) adopts a novel diffusion-based framework to generate isolated characters
and arranges them using external layout prediction modules, achieving SOTA performance. How-
ever, these methods all fundamentally operate at the character or word level, lacking the ability to
capture long-range dependencies and overall text-line structure.
To tackle these limitations, we propose DiffInk, a novel glyph- and style-aware conditional la-
tent diffusion Transformer for TOHG. DiffInk begins by training a sequential variational autoen-
coder (VAE) to learn compact latent representations of full text lines, thereby avoiding character-by-
character modeling and capturing long-range structural dependencies. However, although a vanilla
VAE can accurately reconstruct handwriting sequences when trained with only reconstruction loss,
adding auxiliary perceptual losses directly on the generated outputs yields limited benefit, as the
representations it learns lack semantic structure. Specifically, the VAE fails to group features by
writer identity or character label in its internal representation space. As illustrated in the left panels
of Figure 2 (a) and (b), features from different writers or characters overlap in an unstructured man-
ner. As a result, small perturbations introduced by the diffusion model in this space can easily push
the generated output toward an incorrect writing style or an unintended character.
To resolve this, we introduce two lightweight regularization losses to regulate semantic structure in
the latent space: (1) an OCR-based loss to ensure glyph-level accuracy and (2) a style-classification
loss to enforce writer-level consistency. These losses are implemented by two trainable classifiers
directly applied in the latent space and jointly optimized with the VAE reconstruction loss. We refer
to the resulting enhanced VAE as InkVAE, which learns a well-structured latent space where glyph
and style features are both effectively disentangled, enabling precise control over content and style
generation. As evidenced in the right panels of Figure 2 (a) and (b), this regularization substantially
restructures the latent space, yielding distinct clustering by both character and writing style. This
regularized latent space offers a robust foundation for conditional generation.
Building on this regularized latent space, we then develop a novel InkDiT that synthesizes full-line
handwriting conditioned on both target text sequences and short reference trajectories. The InkDiT
denoises latent representations concatenated with textual content and style features, predicting clean
outputs through iterative refinement. Specifically, textual content features are obtained by sequen-
tially mapping characters to embeddings from a learnable codebook, followed by a lightweight
content encoder. Style features are extracted from the reference trajectories using our InkVAE en-
coder. These features encompass both local attributes (e.g., character shapes and strokes) and global
attributes (e.g., spacing and alignment). Subsequently, InkDiT effectively leverages these conditions
to generate content-accurate and style-consistent results.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) We propose DiffInk, the first latent
diffusion framework for end-to-end full-line handwriting generation, capable of generating glyph-
accurate and style-consistent pen trajectories. (2) We introduce InkVAE, a sequential VAE enhanced
with two task-relevant lightweight regularization losses (OCR-based loss and style-classification
loss) to disentangle content and style in the latent space, enabling structured representation learning.
(3) We propose a novel InkDiT that jointly conditions on target text and reference style, generating
realistic handwriting trajectories via an iterative denoising process. (4) Experiments on the CASIA-
OLHWDB 2.0–2.2 benchmark demonstrate that DiffInk significantly outperforms current SOTA
methods in full-line generation quality, while also offering improved efficiency.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
ONLINE HANDWRITING GENERATION
Early methods for online handwriting generation were predominantly RNN-based. Approaches such
as Graves’ seminal work (Graves, 2013) and DeepWriting (Aksan et al., 2018) adopted LSTMs
with mixture density networks to model temporal dynamics, but lacked explicit style control.
SketchRNN (Ha & Eck, 2017) used an RNN-based VAE to generate ink data unconditionally. More
recently, TrInk (Jin et al., 2025) introduced a Transformer-based architecture, which leverages global
attention to generate more realistic and coherent handwriting trajectories.
In contrast to Latin-based scripts, languages like Chinese possess a vast set of characters with
highly complex structures and stroke compositions, which has led to the proposal of specialized
approaches to capture these intricacies. FontRNN (Tang et al., 2019) incorporated monotonic atten-
tion for stroke-level synthesis, while CHWmaster (Li et al., 2024) utilized a sliding-window RNN
for few-shot personalized generation. SDT (Dai et al., 2023) employed dual-branch encoders with
contrastive learning to disentangle writer style from character content, and WLU (Tang & Lian,
2021) applied meta-learning to support rapid personalization. Building on the diffusion paradigm,
DiffWriter (Ren et al., 2023) formulated character-level synthesis as a conditional denoising process,
and OLHWG (Ren et al., 2025) further extended this framework by decoupling glyph synthesis and
layout planning, thereby enabling layout-aware generation of full handwritten text lines. However,
these approaches essentially remain focused on modeling individual glyphs, with limited efforts
toward directly modeling entire text lines. While OLHWG assumes that character generation is in-
dependent of layout position and attempts to decouple a text line into isolated characters and layout
modules, such assumptions fail to capture the complexity of real handwriting. Appendix D.1 further
discusses our distinctions from existing character-level and layout-decoupled approaches.
2.2
STYLE TRANSFER FOR HANDWRITING GENERATION
Controlling both content and style remains a central challenge in handwriting generation. For con-
tent representation, most methods employ content encoders to extract structural information from
template inputs (Pippi et al., 2023). Some approaches (Pan et al., 2023; Kang et al., 2021) further
design fine-grained encoders to capture detailed local patterns. Alternatively, several methods (Ren
et al., 2023; 2025) adopt learnable character embeddings to provide high-level semantic information.
For style representation, early approaches (Kang et al., 2020; Gui et al., 2023) employed learnable
style embeddings to represent the writing style of specific authors. Later methods (Dai et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2024) introduced style encoders to extract style features from a few reference samples,
using mechanisms such as cross-attention or adaptive normalization (Huang & Belongie, 2017) to
guide the generation process and maintain stylistic consistency. (Kotani et al., 2020) obtains style
representations via matrix factorization. For text-line handwriting generation, using a continuous
text-line reference (Li et al., 2024; Pippi et al., 2025) has become a popular approach to encode
local writing style and overall layout.
2.3
DIFFUSION GENERATIVE MODELS
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) have emerged as powerful tools in generative modeling, demon-
strating impressive performance across images (Rombach et al., 2022), speech (Lee et al., 2025),
and vision-language tasks (Luo et al., 2023). To reduce computational costs and enhance semantic
control, many recent works (Zhang et al., 2023; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Labs,
2024) adopt latent diffusion models, where the denoising process is conducted in a learned latent
space. Recently, Diffusion Transformers (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) have replaced traditional
U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) backbones with Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017) archi-
tectures, enabling stronger global conditioning in image synthesis tasks. Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (van den Oord et al., 2017; Baevski et al., 2020) are commonly used to construct such spaces,
offering compact and structured representations.
Overall, while considerable progress has been made in handwriting generation and latent diffusion
modeling, generating complete online handwritten text lines remains a challenging and underex-
plored task due to long-range dependencies and complex layouts. To this end, we propose DiffInk, a
structure-aware generative framework based on a latent diffusion Transformer, providing a promis-
ing direction for tackling text-to-online handwriting generation.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
𝒩(0, 𝐈)
OCR 
Model
Style  
Classifier
VAE Encoder
𝑋
"𝑋
DiT Denoiser
Content Encoder
Writer ID
Text : 我本楚狂人，凤歌笑孔丘。
Timestep t
(a) InkVAE Training
(b) InkDiT Training
Text Line
𝑋'()
𝑋
Noised feature: 𝑥!
VAE Encoder
VAE Encoder
ℒ*+
ℒ'(,
ℒ-.))
ℒ/,'
ℒ012
VAE Decoder
Look up from Codebook
我本
丘。
…
Padded embeddings
我本楚狂人，凤歌笑孔丘。
Content: 𝑍
Concat
Regularization branch
𝑥"
Style: 𝑥#$%
Add noise
Figure 3: Overview of the DiffInk Framework. (a) InkVAE encodes online handwriting sequences
into compact latent representations. During training, regularization losses Locr and Lsty are applied
to the latent space to encourage disentangled glyph and style. (b) InkDiT leverages this latent space
to synthesize handwriting by denoising noisy inputs xt into clean representations x0. The process
is conditioned on content features Z obtained from text embeddings and style features xref derived
from a reference trajectory. InkDiT is trained with a diffusion loss Ldiff.
3
METHOD
3.1
PRELIMINARY
Online Handwriting Data
An online handwriting text-line data is represented as a pair (T, X),
where T = {t1, t2, . . . , tm} denotes a sequence of m characters, and X = {seq1, seq2, . . . , seqm}
is the corresponding sequence of pen trajectories. Each seqi ∈Rni×5 encodes the trajectory of
character ti with ni points. The total number of points for the entire line is Pm
i=1 ni. Each point is
represented as a 5-dimensional vector (x, y, pen), where (x, y) are spatial coordinates and pen is a
one-hot vector indicating the pen state: Pen Down, Pen Up, or End of Character.
Task Overview
Compared with single-character handwriting generation, TOHG is considerably
more complex and challenging. First, text-line generation often involves much longer sequences
(typically over 25 characters), which substantially increases modeling difficulty. Moreover, in addi-
tion to capturing handwriting style, TOHG also involves modeling inter-character dependencies and
structural relationships across the line to produce fluent and natural handwriting. To make the prob-
lem precise, we therefore formalize TOHG as follows: the input consists of a reference trajectory
Xref and a concatenated text combining Tref and Tgen, and the goal is to generate a trajectory Xgen
that renders Tgen while preserving the handwriting style in Xref.
3.2
OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFINK FRAMEWORK
As illustrated in Figure 3, DiffInk consists of two key components: InkVAE, a pre-trained sequential
variational autoencoder, and InkDiT, a conditional latent diffusion Transformer. InkVAE compresses
online trajectories X ∈RN×5 into latent representations x ∈Rl×d, capturing both glyph-level
structures and writer-specific style features. InkDiT operates within this structured latent space. It
receives a noisy latent input xt along with two conditioning signals: (1) a style prompt xref ∈Rl×d,
obtained by encoding the reference trajectory Xref with the InkVAE encoder; and (2) a content
condition Z ∈Rl×dtext, encoded by the content encoder from text embeddings. Guided by these
conditions, InkDiT denoises xt to reconstruct the clean latent representation x0. During inference,
the process starts from pure Gaussian noise and, under the same content and style conditions as in
training, applies DDIM sampling to obtain a clean latent representation. This refined latent is then
decoded by the InkVAE decoder to generate the final handwriting sequence.
3.3
GLYPH- AND STYLE-AWARE INKVAE
As shown in Figure 3 (a), InkVAE employs an encoder–decoder architecture, primarily designed for
efficient modeling of handwriting sequences through a compact latent space. Beyond this, InkVAE
incorporates a novel task-relevant regularization strategy to construct a well-structured latent space,
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
which promotes the disentanglement of content and style, leading to more robust representations
across both diverse handwriting styles and character classes. Such structured representations, as
evidenced by recent studies (Tang et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025), have been shown
to improve the convergence efficiency and overall performance of downstream diffusion models.
Trajectory Encoder
To extract complex handwriting features, we employ a 1D convolutional en-
coder to transform the input handwriting sequence X ∈RN×5 into a compact latent representation
x ∈Rl×d. This representation is directly provided as input to three branches: (1) a trajectory
decoder for handwriting reconstruction, (2) a Transformer-based OCR module for text-line hand-
writing recognition, and (3) a style classifier for writer identification.
Trajectory Decoder
Following (Tang et al., 2019), the decoder first applies a 1D convolutional
stack that mirrors the trajectory encoder, up-sampling the latent feature x into a feature map Ot ∈
RN×(6p+3). The feature vector Ot is divided into two branches: (1) 6p logits that parameterize a p-
component Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) (Reynolds, 2015) for predicting the (x, y) coordinates,
and (2) 3 logits for classifying the pen state pen. Accordingly, the reconstruction loss is defined as
Lrec = Lpen + Lgmm, where Lpen is a focal loss used for the three-way pen-state classification, and
Lgmm is the negative log-likelihood of the ground-truth points under the predicted mixture. To enable
the model to learn when to stop writing, the GMM loss is computed only over valid trajectory steps,
while the pen-state loss is applied across the entire sequence, including padded regions.
Glyph- and Style-Aware Regularization
To encourage the latent space to preserve character-
level structural information, we introduce a lightweight OCR module as a structural regularizer.
Operating at the feature-token level, this module promotes consistency in the representations of the
same character class across different writing styles. Specifically, the OCR module decodes latent
representations into character sequences using a Transformer-based recognition head, and is trained
with a CTC-based (Graves et al., 2006) loss, denoted as Locr. This supervision imposes structural
constraints on the encoder, promoting the learning of character-invariant features and enhancing
both the structural awareness and semantic disentanglement of the latent space.
On the other hand, to enhance the discriminability of writing styles in the latent space, we introduce
a lightweight style encoder as a global discriminative supervisor. This module processes the entire
latent representation to extract a holistic style representation. It summarizes the latent features using
an LSTM network (Staudemeyer & Morris, 2019) with attention pooling and is optimized by a writer
classification loss (Lsty), which explicitly encourages style-aware separation in the latent space.
VAE Loss Function
InkVAE is trained end-to-end with the objective function LVAE defined in
Equation 1. This training strategy enables the encoder to learn latent representations that are struc-
turally coherent, semantically aligned, and stylistically informative, providing a solid foundation for
diffusion-based handwriting synthesis. Details of InkVAE are presented in the Appendix B.1.
LVAE =
X
λℓ· Lℓ
where ℓ∈{rec, kl, ocr, sty}
(1)
3.4
HANDWRITING GENERATION WITH INKDIT
As shown in Figure 3 (b), InkDiT employs a Transformer-based diffusion architecture for con-
ditional online handwriting generation in the latent space. It builds on InkVAE’s compact and
structured representation and progressively refines noisy latent variables into coherent trajectories
through denoising. By conditioning on both text-line Tref + Tgen and a reference trajectory Xref,
InkDiT achieves controllable generation with improved fidelity and continuity.
Text-Line Content
For content representation, each character in the input text Tref + Tgen is em-
bedded via a learnable codebook ∈RK×dtext, where K is the vocabulary size and dtext is the em-
bedding dimension. By embedding characters directly, the approach learns high-level semantic
representations of characters, while avoiding the domain gap caused by the complex mapping from
fixed templates to long handwritten text-line sequences (Wang et al., 2023; 2026). Text-line gener-
ation is further challenged by uncertain character lengths at inference, which prevent direct embed-
ding–trajectory alignment as in character-level methods (Ren et al., 2023; 2025). We address this
through a simple yet efficient design where character embeddings are sequentially concatenated,
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
padded with shared learnable embeddings to match x0, and processed by a lightweight content en-
coder. Based on ConvNeXt-V2 (Woo et al., 2023), this encoder leverages large-kernel depthwise
convolutions to capture long-range dependencies and yields a representation Z ∈Rl×dtext serving as
semantically aligned content conditions for generation guidance.
Text-Line Handwriting Style
For style representation, character-level approaches (Dai et al.,
2023; Tang & Lian, 2021; Ren et al., 2025) typically rely on randomly sampled isolated characters
from the same writer. In contrast, text-line generation requires capturing additional layout informa-
tion absent in such isolated samples. To holistically model both writing style and text-line layout,
we follow (Li et al., 2024; Pippi et al., 2025) and adopt a continuous handwritten trajectory Xref as
the style reference. This trajectory is encoded into a latent representation by the trajectory encoder
of our proposed style-aware InkVAE. Leveraging the VAE encoder’s strength as a versatile feature
extractor (Leng et al., 2025; Cheng & Yuan, 2025), we obtain the style feature xref. By modeling
style directly within the unified latent space of the VAE (Tan et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025), we
avoid introducing a separate style encoder and ensure consistent representation learning.
DiT Denoiser
The diffusion network follows the DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2023) architecture, leverag-
ing its contextual modeling capacity to recover the clean latent from noisy inputs under the guidance
of content features Z and style features xref. The three inputs are concatenated along the channel
dimension and linearly projected to align with the InkVAE feature space.
xt = √¯αt · x0 +
√
1 −¯αt · ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(2)
ˆx0 = InkDiTθ([xt, xref, Z], t);
Ldiff = Ex,t[mask ⊙|ˆxθ −x0|2]
(3)
DiT denoiser is trained to recover the clean feature x0 at masked positions by minimizing the masked
mean squared error (MSE), as defined in Equation 3, where the masked regions correspond to the
reference style trajectory features. Benefiting from the semantically structured latent space provided
by InkVAE, the DiT model can more effectively utilize conditional inputs to recover features from
noise, resulting in better alignment with the underlying data distribution. Following the DDIM (Song
et al., 2020) sampling strategy, we start from Gaussian noise and iteratively generate the final latent
estimate ˆx0, conditioned on both content and style features. Finally, this latent representation is de-
coded by the InkVAE decoder to reconstruct the handwriting trajectory. Details of InkDiT, including
its architectural design as well as training and inference procedures, are presented in Appendix B.2.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
DATASET & EVALUATION METRICS
Dataset
We conduct experiments to validate DiffInk on Chinese handwriting datasets. For Chi-
nese TOHG, we use CASIA-OLHWDB 2.0–2.2 (Liu et al., 2011), sampling 500 writers based on
longer average text lines. Among them, 400 writers are used for training and 100 for testing. We
then augment the training set with synthesized samples, yielding 67,000 text lines covering 2,648
characters. The test set comprises 4,780 text lines. Details are presented in the Appendix A.
Evaluation Metrics
To comprehensively evaluate the proposed DiffInk,
following prior
works (Tang & Lian, 2021; Dai et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2025), we employ several widely used
evaluation metrics, including: (1) Content fidelity, assessed with a pretrained text-line OCR model
by reporting Accurate Rate (AR) and Correct Rate (CR) following the (Yin et al., 2013) OLHCTR
benchmark; (2) Style consistency, measured with a writer classifier via writer classification accuracy
(Style); (3) Trajectory similarity, evaluated using normalized Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) dis-
tance (Berndt & Clifford, 1994; Chen et al., 2022); (4) Generation efficiency, reported as the number
of characters generated per second (Avg. char/s). Details are presented in Appendix B.4.
4.2
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
For Chinese TOHG, InkVAE is trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 128 and a learning rate
of 5 × 10−4. To balance different objectives, we apply the following loss weights: λgmm = 1.0,
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: Quantitative comparison with SOTA handwriting generation methods. Baseline meth-
ods generate isolated characters and compose text lines through a shared layout prediction module
from OLHWG. In contrast, our method directly generates complete text lines and outperforms these
single-character approaches across all evaluation metrics.
Method
Venue
Output
AR% ↑
CR% ↑
Style ↑
DTW ↓
Avg. char/s ↑
Drawing (Zhang et al., 2017)
TPAMI’17
Char-level
76.35
76.87
25.75
1.582
4.16
DeepImitator (Zhao et al., 2020)
PR’20
Char-level
78.21
78.98
27.62
1.561
3.96
WLU (Tang & Lian, 2021)
CGF’21
Char-level
79.85
80.23
35.71
1.540
25.19
SDT (Dai et al., 2023)
CVPR’23
Char-level
82.53
83.00
50.51
1.270
3.35
OLHWG (Ren et al., 2025)
ICLR’25
Char+layout
91.48
91.71
44.74
1.326
0.07
DiffInk
This work
Line-level
94.38
94.58
77.38
1.049
58.47
λpen = 2.0, λocr = 1.0, λsty = 0.5, and λkl = 1 × 10−6. The DiT model is trained for 200k steps
with a batch size of 256 and a learning rate of 7.5 × 10−5. Details are presented in the Appendix B.
4.3
MAIN RESULTS
Comparing with Representative Methods
As there is a lack of established baselines for end-
to-end text-line generation, we adopt several SOTA character generation methods and extend them
with a layout modeling module to enable line-level comparison. These baselines include Draw-
ing (Zhang et al., 2017), DeepImitator (Zhao et al., 2020), WLU (Tang & Lian, 2021), and SDT (Dai
et al., 2023), which generate high-fidelity handwritten characters under an autoregressive paradigm,
as well as OLHWG (Ren et al., 2025), which synthesizes isolated characters using a diffusion-
based approach. To support text-line level comparison, we adopt the layout prediction module from
OLHWG—currently the SOTA—to compose full lines from the character-level outputs of all five
methods. In the OLHWG method, the layout prediction module infers the subsequent layout based
on the layouts of a fixed number of preceding characters (originally set to 10) from the ground-truth
text line. To accommodate text lines of varying lengths, we instead use the layouts of the first 30%
of characters from each text line as input for layout prediction (max 10). To ensure fairness, all
methods are retrained on the same dataset with consistent preprocessing and default configurations.
Quantitative Evaluation
As shown in Table 1, DiffInk (ours) achieves superior performance
across all quantitative metrics. For content fidelity, the OCR-based metrics AR and CR both ex-
ceed 94%, outperforming the latest SOTA method OLHWG by an average margin of 3 percentage
points, and substantially surpassing earlier approaches such as Drawing, DeepImitator, WLU and
SDT—with a margin of 14.44%. For style consistency, DiffInk achieves a style score of 77.38 at
the text-line level—the highest among all methods—surpassing the contrastive-learning–based OL-
HWG by 30 percentage points, the dual-branch style-loss–based SDT by 27 points, and baselines
with simple style modeling by an average of 50 points. Moreover, style evaluation further reveals
that layout stitching introduces anomalies that can be readily detected by the style classifier. In
terms of structural fidelity, DiffInk attains substantially lower normalized DTW distances, indicat-
ing more consistent alignment with target trajectories. In contrast, autoregressive methods such as
WLU and SDT suffer from cumulative error propagation, which severely degrades text-line level
performance. Finally, DiffInk demonstrates strong generation efficiency, producing 58.82 charac-
ters per second—17× faster than SDT, over 800× faster than OLHWG, and more than 2× faster than
WLU—thanks to the efficient text-line modeling of InkVAE.
Qualitative Evaluation
As shown in Figure 4, DiffInk (ours) produces more continuous and co-
herent text lines with smooth character transitions. In contrast, character-wise methods such as SDT
and OLHWG often exhibit unnatural stitching artifacts at character boundaries, while WLU tends
to generate characters that stick together, likely due to its strong reliance on the pretrained con-
tent–style encoder. These problems arise partly because character-level methods can only assemble
text lines by scaling and positioning individual characters according to their predicted bounding
boxes. During inference, obtaining these bounding boxes requires an additional prediction module,
which introduces its own errors and further affects the reliability of the final text-line layout. Be-
yond these practical limitations, although their single-character generation quality is generally good,
the decoupled modeling of layout and characters neglects structural dependencies between adjacent
characters, making it difficult to achieve consistent and coherent text-line layouts when character
shapes differ substantially. Additional visualization results are provided in Appendix C.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
OLHWG
SDT
Target
OLHWG
SDT
Bottom-Left to Top-Right Layout
Horizontal Layout
Top-Left to Bottom-Right Layout
Method
Text
“面纱”。它将于2013年接替退休的哈勃望远镜，帮助科学家观
据日本《东京新闻》网站22日报道说,日本研究人员从十字花科植
成。遥见仙人彩云间,手把芙蓉朝玉京。先期汗漫九垓上,愿接卢敖
根据牛顿在一七零四年的一封书信上的记载
根据以色列《国家报》报道,牛顿在十七世纪中是最知名
到蓝翅蝴蝶草中,这种转基因蓝翅蝴蝶草吸收磷的能力提高
Text
DiffInk
(Ours)
WLU
WLU
Deep
Imitator
Deep
Imitator
Drawing
Drawing
Figure 4: Comparison with SOTA methods under unseen writing styles across diverse layouts. All
baseline methods generate isolated characters and compose lines via a shared layout module.
Blue boxes denote the same style reference, while red boxes highlight errors or unnatural character
connections. These methods suffer from stitching artifacts, especially when adjacent characters
differ structurally. DiffInk generates more coherent and naturally connected text lines.
Table 2: Ablation study of InkVAE and its impact on InkDiT generation. ”✓” means loss en-
abled. While all VAEs achieve near-perfect reconstruction performance with various losses, InkDiT
achieves optimal performance when trained on InkVAE latents (last row). This confirms that our
lightweight regularization losses structure the latent space for robust diffusion-based genera-
tion, with negligible impact on VAE reconstruction performance.
VAE Losses
VAE Reconstruction Performance
InkDiT Generation Performance
Lrec+kl
Locr
Lsty
AR% ↑
CR% ↑
Style ↑
DTW ↓
AR% ↑
CR% ↑
Style ↑
DTW ↓
✓
✗
✗
97.59
97.61
99.97
0.014
74.77
75.20
60.68
1.062
✓
✓
✗
97.60
97.63
99.97
0.015
82.09
82.41
66.07
1.052
✓
✗
✓
97.59
97.62
99.98
0.016
79.64
79.95
68.99
1.059
✓
✓
✓
97.65
97.67
99.97
0.016
94.38
94.58
77.38
1.049
4.4
ABLATION STUDY OF INKVAE AND INKDIT
Effect of InkVAE and its impact on InkDiT
As shown in Table 2, we perform an ablation study
to evaluate the effectiveness of InkVAE. The left columns list the loss configurations of different
VAE variants, the middle columns report reconstruction performance, and the right columns present
generation results of InkDiT trained on the corresponding feature spaces. Since online handwriting
data is relatively clean and less affected by background noise than image-pixel modeling, VAEs
trained solely with the reconstruction loss Lrec already achieve high-fidelity reconstructions, as re-
flected by the low DTW distances in the middle columns. However, the diffusion results reveal a
key limitation: strong reconstruction fidelity does not guarantee a well-structured or semantically
meaningful latent space. Compared with the Vanilla VAE, adding OCR regularization improves
recognition accuracy by about 4 points, while style regularization yields an 8-point gain in the
writer-classification score. When combined—forming our proposed InkVAE—the latent space be-
comes markedly more suitable for diffusion modeling, as evidenced by the best overall results across
recognition accuracy, style classification score, and DTW distance.
Figure 2 further visualizes the latent space. Unlike the Vanilla VAE, which fails to form clear clusters
by writing style or character class, InkVAE—with OCR and style regularization—produces well-
separated clusters, yielding more discriminative and semantically meaningful representations. This
shows that although the Vanilla VAE reconstructs sequences well, its latent features lack sufficient
semantic information, so even small perturbations may lead to content errors or stylistic drift during
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
+ OCR + Style 
loss (ours)
+ Style loss
+ OCR loss
Baseline
Target
VAE Model
DiT generation results (trained on corresponding VAE)
Figure 5: InkDiT Generation with VAE Vari-
ants. Blue boxes highlight content errors; red
boxes indicate style inconsistencies.
InkDiT
trained on the latent space from our InkVAE
yields more accurate and consistent results.
Table 3: Ablation study of InkDiT. The con-
tent encoder with ConvNextV2 significantly im-
proves content accuracy and style consistency
with minimal overhead, while introducing long-
skip residual connections leads to performance
degradation and additional computational cost.
Model
AR% ↑CR% ↑Style ↑DTW ↓Avg. char/s ↑
w/ Longskip
71.73
71.91
55.42
1.074
55.55
w/o ConvNextV2 81.51
81.71
65.49
1.052
71.94
DiffInk (Ours)
94.38
94.58
77.38
1.049
58.47
generation. Building on this, Figure 5 presents qualitative results of InkDiT trained on different
VAE variants. While the Vanilla VAE often produces inaccurate content and inconsistent styles,
InkVAE achieves both high content fidelity and stylistic consistency, demonstrating the effectiveness
of disentangled latent spaces for controllable handwriting generation.
w/o ConvNext
DiffInk(Ours)
手稿展“的希伯来大学
秦心之叠道初成
Text
Target
Figure 6: Ablation study on the content en-
coder. Without the content encoder, content er-
rors (red boxes) occur frequently.
Effect of InkDiT
As shown in Table 3, we per-
form an ablation study on InkDiT. Introducing
long skip connections results in degraded per-
formance, whereas removing the content encoder
causes a marked drop in content quality and fur-
ther undermines style consistency. Interestingly,
even with simple padding of text embeddings and
without explicit sequence-length annotations, the
content encoder effectively captures long-range
dependencies and provides accurate semantic conditioning. This effectiveness can be attributed
to its ConvNeXt-V2 (Woo et al., 2023) backbone with large convolutional kernels, which not only
provide a broad receptive field but also integrate embeddings across spatial and sequential dimen-
sions. Such integration yields more robust alignment of character content embeddings with the VAE
latent space, preventing over-reliance on individual tokens. Moreover, by enriching the contextual
information, the content encoder mitigates semantic ambiguity: without it, the model must rely on
sparse text embeddings, which often leads to misalignment and confusion. The visual results in Fig-
ure 6 further support these observations, demonstrating that, without the content encoder, generated
text exhibits poor alignment and semantic drift.
4.5
FINE-GRAINED CHARACTER–LAYOUT ANALYSIS
As shown in Figure 7, we visualize character centroids (red dots) for each method and connect them
to reveal layout trends. Baseline methods exhibit unnatural connections between adjacent charac-
ters in certain regions (highlighted by red boxes), stemming from their assumption that character
content and layout can be modeled independently. This often results in broken baselines and dis-
continuous structures. This phenomenon points to a fundamental property of handwritten text lines:
character layout and connections cannot be fully disentangled, as they remain inherently context-
dependent. Importantly, text-line layout is not merely arranging character bounding boxes; it should
also account for the structural properties of individual characters and the contextual dependencies
among their neighbors. Rather than treating layout as a separate post-processing step, DiffInk di-
rectly models the spatial arrangement and inter-character connections of the entire text line within a
structure-aware latent space, thereby producing more coherent and consistent results.
都系独立运作
汉外长城北线
Text
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk (Ours)
Target
WLU
Drawing
DeepIminator
Figure 7: Fine-Grained Layout Analysis. Baseline methods show local misalignments (red boxes),
while DiffInk achieves more coherent and consistent layouts.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
DeepIminator
WLU
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk (Ours)
Drawing
Figure 8: Comparison of data distributions between generated and real data. t-SNE (Maaten &
Hinton, 2008) visualization of features from the same text lines generated by baselines and DiffInk.
DiffInk closely overlaps with real data, while baselines show varying degrees of deviation.
4.6
VISUALIZATIONS WITH T-SNE
As shown in Figure 8, the t-SNE visualization of features extracted by the trajectory encoder reveals
that DiffInk’s generated text lines closely overlap with real handwritten samples, indicating that
DiffInk effectively captures the distribution of authentic handwriting. In contrast, baseline methods
that synthesize characters individually and concatenate them using bounding boxes exhibit a notice-
able distributional shift from real data. This suggests that although text lines can be reconstructed
through post-hoc concatenation, such pipelines struggle to model the coupling between character
shapes and text-line layout, which in real handwriting arises from continuous writing dynamics and
natural inter-character transitions. As a result, character-concatenation methods fail to reproduce
the holistic structure of real text lines, whereas DiffInk’s end-to-end modeling captures both global
layout and stylistic coherence more faithfully. These results further confirm that modeling the entire
text line as a unified sequence is essential for preserving realistic handwriting statistics.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose DiffInk, a pioneering conditional latent diffusion Transformer frame-
work for TOHG. Our key contributions are: (1) a task-aware variational autoencoder (InkVAE)
that incorporates OCR-based and style regularization to learn a semantically structured latent space
with disentangled content and style; and (2) a conditional latent diffusion Transformer (InkDiT)
that conditions on textual input and reference styles to generate coherent pen trajectories. Built
upon these components, DiffInk produces full-line handwritten text with high content accuracy, con-
sistent style, and natural inter-character transitions. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that
DiffInk significantly outperforms existing methods, validating the effectiveness of our approach.
This work establishes the effectiveness of the conditional latent diffusion model for complex on-
line handwriting generation and highlights its potential for OCR, personalized digital handwriting
applications, and human-computer interaction systems. Limitations and discussions, including ex-
tensions to paragraph-level generation and to other languages are presented in Appendix D.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
No.:62476093).
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Reproduction consists of dataset preparation (Sections 4.1 and Appendix A), the design of DiffInk
(InkVAE and InkDiT) as described in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, implementation and training detailed in
Appendix B and Section 4.2, and evaluation following Section 4.3 and Appendix B.4.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
REFERENCES
Emre Aksan, Fabrizio Pece, and Otmar Hilliges. Deepwriting: Making digital ink editable via deep
generative modeling. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, pp. 1–14, 2018.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
work for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020.
Donald J Berndt and James Clifford. Using dynamic time warping to find patterns in time series.
In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp.
359–370, 1994.
Bowen Chen, Mengyi Zhao, Haomiao Sun, Li Chen, Xu Wang, Kang Du, and Xinglong Wu. Xverse:
Consistent multi-subject control of identity and semantic attributes via dit modulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.21416, 2025.
Zhounan Chen, Daihui Yang, Jinglin Liang, Xinwu Liu, Yuyi Wang, Zhenghua Peng, and Shuang-
ping Huang. Complex handwriting trajectory recovery: Evaluation metrics and algorithm. In
Proceedings of the asian conference on computer vision, pp. 1060–1076, 2022.
Yu Cheng and Fajie Yuan. Leanvae: An ultra-efficient reconstruction vae for video diffusion models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14325, 2025.
Gang Dai, Yifan Zhang, Qingfeng Wang, Qing Du, Zhuliang Yu, Zhuoman Liu, and Shuangping
Huang. Disentangling writer and character styles for handwriting generation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5977–5986, 2023.
DeepSeek-AI.
Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with longtermism.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.
David H Douglas and Thomas K Peucker. Algorithms for the reduction of the number of points
required to represent a digitized line or its caricature. Cartographica: the international journal
for geographic information and geovisualization, 10(2):112–122, 1973.
Alex Graves.
Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.
Alex Graves, Santiago Fern´andez, Faustino Gomez, and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Connectionist tem-
poral classification: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 369–376, 2006.
Dongnan Gui, Kai Chen, Haisong Ding, and Qiang Huo. Zero-shot generation of training data
with denoising diffusion probabilistic model for handwritten chinese character recognition. In
Document Analysis and Recognition - ICDAR 2023, pp. 348–365. Springer, 2023.
Jinpei Guo, Zheng Chen, Wenbo Li, Yong Guo, and Yulun Zhang. Compression-aware one-step
diffusion model for jpeg artifact removal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09873, 2025.
David Ha and Douglas Eck.
A neural representation of sketch drawings.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.03477, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1501–1510,
2017.
Zezhong Jin, Shubhang Desai, Xu Chen, Biyi Fang, Zhuoyi Huang, Zhe Li, Chong-Xin Gan, Xiao
Tu, Man-Wai Mak, Yan Lu, and Shujie Liu. Trink: Ink generation with transformer network. In
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
4857–4864, 2025.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Lei Kang, Pau Riba, Yaxing Wang, Marc¸al Rusinol, Alicia Forn´es, and Mauricio Villegas. Ganwrit-
ing: content-conditioned generation of styled handwritten word images. In European conference
on computer vision, pp. 273–289. Springer, 2020.
Lei Kang, Pau Riba, Marcal Rusinol, Alicia Fornes, and Mauricio Villegas.
Content and style
aware generation of text-line images for handwriting recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(12):8846–8860, 2021.
Atsunobu Kotani, Stefanie Tellex, and James Tompkin. Generating handwriting via decoupled style
descriptors. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 764–780. Springer, 2020.
Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux, 2024.
Sang-Hoon Lee, Ha-Yeong Choi, Seung-Bin Kim, and Seong-Whan Lee. Hierspeech++: Bridg-
ing the gap between semantic and acoustic representation of speech by hierarchical variational
inference for zero-shot speech synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 36(10):18422–18436, 2025.
Xingjian Leng, Jaskirat Singh, Yunzhong Hou, Zhenchang Xing, Saining Xie, and Liang Zheng.
Repa-e: Unlocking vae for end-to-end tuning with latent diffusion transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.10483, 2025.
Shilong Li, Shusen Tang, and Zhouhui Lian. Chwmaster: mastering chinese handwriting via sliding-
window recurrent neural networks. International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition
(IJDAR), 27(3):275–288, 2024.
Cheng-Lin Liu, Fei Yin, Da-Han Wang, and Qiu-Feng Wang. Casia online and offline chinese
handwriting databases. In 2011 International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition,
pp. 37–41. IEEE, 2011.
Yu Liu, Fatimah Binti Khalid, Lei Wang, Youxi Zhang, and Cunrui Wang. Elegantly written: Dis-
entangling writer and character styles for enhancing online chinese handwriting. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 409–425. Springer, 2024.
Marcus Liwicki and Horst Bunke. Iam-ondb-an on-line english sentence database acquired from
handwritten text on a whiteboard. In Eighth International Conference on Document Analysis and
Recognition (ICDAR’05), pp. 956–961. IEEE, 2005.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
Decoupled weight decay regularization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Canjie Luo, Yuanzhi Zhu, Lianwen Jin, Zhe Li, and Dezhi Peng. Slogan: handwriting style syn-
thesis for arbitrary-length and out-of-vocabulary text. IEEE transactions on neural networks and
learning systems, 34(11):8503–8515, 2022.
Jianjie Luo, Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Jianlin Feng, Hongyang Chao, and Tao Mei.
Semantic-conditional diffusion networks for image captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 23359–23368, 2023.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
learning research, 9(Nov):2579–2605, 2008.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Wei Pan, Anna Zhu, Xinyu Zhou, Brian Kenji Iwana, and Shilin Li. Few shot font generation via
transferring similarity guided global style and quantization local style. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19506–19516, 2023.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Dezhi Peng, Canyu Xie, Hongliang Li, Lianwen Jin, Zecheng Xie, Kai Ding, Yichao Huang, and
Yaqiang Wu. Towards fast, accurate and compact online handwritten chinese text recognition. In
Document Analysis and Recognition – ICDAR 2021, pp. 157–171. Springer, 2021.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Vittorio Pippi, Silvia Cascianelli, and Rita Cucchiara.
Handwritten text generation from visual
archetypes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pp. 22458–22467, 2023.
Vittorio Pippi, Fabio Quattrini, Silvia Cascianelli, Alessio Tonioni, and Rita Cucchiara. Zero-shot
styled text image generation, but make it autoregressive. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2025.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Min-Si Ren, Yan-Ming Zhang, Qiu-Feng Wang, Fei Yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Diff-writer: a diffusion
model-based stylized online handwritten chinese character generator. In International Conference
on Neural Information Processing, pp. 86–100. Springer, 2023.
Minsi Ren, Yan-Ming Zhang, and yi chen. Decoupling layout from glyph in online chinese hand-
writing generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=DhHIw9Nbl1.
Douglas Reynolds. Gaussian mixture models. In Encyclopedia of biometrics, pp. 827–832. Springer,
2015.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J
Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language
understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Ralf C Staudemeyer and Eric Rothstein Morris. Understanding lstm–a tutorial into long short-term
memory recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09586, 2019.
Zhenxiong Tan, Songhua Liu, Xingyi Yang, Qiaochu Xue, and Xinchao Wang. Ominicontrol: Mini-
mal and universal control for diffusion transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14940–14950, 2025.
Long Tang, Tingting Chai, Zheng Zhang, Miao Zhang, and Xiangqian Wu. Palmdiff: When palm-
print generation meets controllable diffusion model. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 34:
5228–5240, 2025.
Shusen Tang and Zhouhui Lian. Write like you: Synthesizing your cursive online chinese handwrit-
ing via metric-based meta learning. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 40(2), pp. 141–151.
Wiley Online Library, 2021.
Shusen Tang, Zeqing Xia, Zhouhui Lian, Yingmin Tang, and Jianguo Xiao. Fontrnn: Generating
large-scale chinese fonts via recurrent neural network. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume
38(7), pp. 567–577. Wiley Online Library, 2019.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Chi Wang, Min Zhou, Tiezheng Ge, Yuning Jiang, Hujun Bao, and Weiwei Xu. Cf-font: Content
fusion for few-shot font generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1858–1867, 2023.
Honglie Wang, Minsi Ren, Yan-Ming Zhang, Fei Yin, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Template-guided cas-
caded diffusion for stylized handwritten chinese text-line generation. In Document Analysis and
Recognition – ICDAR 2025. Springer, Cham, 2026.
Sanghyun Woo, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, In So Kweon, and
Saining Xie. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16133–
16142, 2023.
Jingfeng Yao, Bin Yang, and Xinggang Wang. Reconstruction vs. generation: Taming optimization
dilemma in latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion Conference, pp. 15703–15712, 2025.
Fei Yin, Qiu-Feng Wang, Xu-Yao Zhang, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Icdar 2013 chinese handwriting recog-
nition competition. In 2013 12th international conference on document analysis and recognition,
pp. 1464–1470. IEEE, 2013.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala.
Adding conditional control to text-to-image
diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Xu-Yao Zhang, Fei Yin, Yan-Ming Zhang, Cheng-Lin Liu, and Yoshua Bengio. Drawing and rec-
ognizing chinese characters with recurrent neural network. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, 40(4):849–862, 2017.
Bocheng Zhao, Jianhua Tao, Minghao Yang, Zhengkun Tian, Cunhang Fan, and Ye Bai. Deep
imitator: Handwriting calligraphy imitation via deep attention networks. Pattern Recognition,
104:107080, 2020.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX SECTION
A Datasets and Preprocessing
15
B
Implementation Details of DiffInk
16
B.1
Details of InkVAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
B.2
Details of InkDiT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
B.3
Training Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
B.4
Evaluation Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C More Experimental Results
19
C.1
Style Control and Consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C.2
More Comparisons with existing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C.3
More Results Generated by DiffInk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
C.4
DDIM Sampling Steps Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
D Discussion
23
D.1
Comparison with Two-Stage Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
D.2
Implementation of DiffInk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
D.3
Applying to Other Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.4
Improving OCR Performance with Synthetic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.5
Personalized Handwriting Generation with DiffInk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
D.6
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
E
Use of Large Language Models (LLMs)
26
A
DATASETS AND PREPROCESSING
0
10
20
30
40
50 52
(max)
Length of Text
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Frequency
Figure 9: Analysis of text-line length distribution
in the Chinese handwriting dataset. Due to dataset
constraints, our method supports up to 52 charac-
ters per line, which is higher than the average of
26.68 characters reported in (Yin et al., 2013) and
sufficient for practical usage.
Dataset
For Chinese TOHG, we use the
CASIA-OLHWDB 2.0–2.2 (Liu et al., 2011)
datasets, which contain over 50,000 online
handwritten text lines collected from 1,019
writers. Due to training resource limitations,
we select 500 writers based on the average
length of their text lines, prioritizing those with
longer and more informative content. Among
them, 400 writers are used for training and 100
for testing. As shown in Figure 9, we further
analyze the text-line length distribution in the
training set, where the average length exceeds
30 characters (higher than the reported 26.68
characters in prior benchmarks (Yin et al.,
2013)) and the maximum length goes beyond
40 characters—sufficient to cover typical text-
line writing scenarios in daily life.
We observe that the character distribution in
text-line data exhibits a pronounced long-tail
pattern.
To mitigate this issue, we design
a frequency-aware data augmentation strategy.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Specifically, we sample isolated character instances written by the same author from CASIA-
OLHWDB 1.0–1.2, with sampling probabilities inversely proportional to their frequencies in the
original text-line corpus—assigning higher selection chances to rare characters. For each sampled
author, we randomly select a text-line from the training set as a layout template, and place the sam-
pled characters according to the original character BBoxes. This strategy enables the construction
of synthetic text-lines that effectively compensate for the scarcity of low-frequency characters. In
total, we generate approximately 67,000 text-line samples for training.
Data processing
We first normalize the (x, y) coordinates of all trajectory points following prior
work (Zhang et al., 2017), to address scale inconsistencies caused by variations in device resolution
and handwriting styles. This normalization facilitates more stable learning of structural patterns in
handwritten text. Subsequently, we apply the Ramer–Douglas–Peucker(RDP) (Douglas & Peucker,
1973) algorithm to each stroke sequence to remove redundant points, thereby reducing the overall
trajectory length and improving computational efficiency. The simplification coefficients are empir-
ically selected based on extensive trial experiments: we set them to 0.4 for CASIA-OLHWDB. The
average sequence length of Chinese handwriting is reduced by about 500 points after simplification.
These values balance preserving handwriting structure with noise reduction, while also shortening
the input sequences. For each batch of text-line data, we pad all sequences to the maximum line
length. The padding regions are filled with x = y = 0, while the pen-state pen is set to the End of
Character symbol.
B
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF DIFFINK
B.1
DETAILS OF INKVAE
Reconstruction and KL Divergence
As the latent modeling module of the latent diffusion Trans-
former, InkVAE is primarily designed to produce compact representations that minimize reconstruc-
tion loss. Specifically, InkVAE adopts a 1D convolutional encoder-decoder architecture with resid-
ual connections. The encoder processes the input handwriting sequence of shape N × 5 through a
series of downsampling layers, progressively transforming it into representations of size N/2×128,
N/4 × 256, and finally N/8 × 384, forming a latent sequence with an 8× temporal compression
ratio. The decoder mirrors this structure with residual 1D convolutional blocks for upsampling,
gradually reconstructing the sequence into N/4 × 384, N/2 × 256, and N × 123. The final out-
put of the decoder parameterizes a p = 20-component Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) for (x, y)
trajectory prediction, with the remaining dimensions used for pen-state classification (3 classes). A
Transformer-based trajectory decoder (3 layers, hidden size 256, 4 heads) is employed to enhance
sequence modeling. The overall reconstruction loss Lrec consists of two components: the negative
log-likelihood loss Lgmm for coordinate modeling, and the cross-entropy loss Lpen for pen-state clas-
sification. A KL divergence loss is also applied to the latent space, as is standard in VAE frameworks,
to promote regularization; to balance reconstruction quality, we follow diffusion-based models and
set its coefficient to a small value.
The Lgmm is defined as Equation 4, where pt = (xt, yt) is the ground-truth point at timestep t,
and each mixture component is parameterized by mean µm,t, covariance Σm,t (often diagonal), and
mixing coefficient πm,t. The pen-state prediction is treated as a 3-way classification task (pen-down,
pen-up, end-of-stroke), with loss defined as Equation 5, where ypen
t,k is the one-hot ground-truth label
and ppen
t,k is the predicted probability for class k at timestep t. This focal loss formulation down-
weights easy samples and focuses training on harder ones.
Lgmm = −1
T
T
X
t=1
log
 M
X
m=1
πm,t · N (pt | µm,t, Σm,t)
!
,
(4)
Lfocal
pen = −1
T
T
X
t=1
3
X
k=1
αk (1 −ppen
t,k)γ ypen
t,k · log ppen
t,k,
(5)
Task relevant Regularization
Recent studies (Tang et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025)
suggest that a well-structured latent space plays a crucial role in the effectiveness of downstream
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Algorithm 1 InkDiT Training and Inference
Training Phase:
1: Input: x0, xref, Z
2: Sample t ∼U(1, T)
3: Sample noise ϵ ∼N(0, I)
4: Compute xt = √¯αt · x0 + √1 −¯αt · ϵ
5: Predict ˆx0 = InkDiTθ([xt, xref, Z], t)
6: Update InkDiTθ using loss: Ldiff = ∥ˆx0 −x0∥2
Inference Phase:
1: Input: xT ∼N(0, I), xref, Z
2: for t = T, . . . , 1 do
3:
ˆx0 = InkDiT([xt, xref, Z], t)
4:
ϵ = (xt −√¯αt · ˆx0)/√1 −¯αt
5:
xt−1 = √¯αt−1 · ˆx0 + √1 −¯αt−1 · ϵ
6: end for
▷Final output: ˆx0
diffusion-based modeling. To this end, beyond trajectory reconstruction, InkVAE introduces two
auxiliary objectives to impose task-specific regularization on the latent space: (1) A style classifier
composed of an LSTM (Staudemeyer & Morris, 2019) with attention pooling and a 400-class writer
identification head, and (2) a Transformer-based OCR module (hidden size 384) equipped with a
2648-class character classifier and trained with CTC loss to encourage content-aware representation
learning. The style classification loss and the OCR loss are defined as Equation 6, where the for-
mer uses a cross-entropy loss between the writer identity label ystyle and the predicted probability
pstyle, and the latter adopts the standard CTC loss (Graves et al., 2006) to align predicted character
sequences with ground-truth transcriptions.
Lsty = −
C
X
c=1
ystyle
c
· log pstyle
c
,
Locr = CTC(Pocr, yocr).
(6)
B.2
DETAILS OF INKDIT
To generate text lines conditioned on character sequences, InkDiT takes as input three components:
the noisy latent representation xt, a style condition xref, and the corresponding text embeddings. The
text embeddings is processed by a lightweight encoder to produce content-aware features. These
three inputs are then fused and projected into a unified joint space, which is subsequently modeled
by a multi-layer Transformer for time-aware latent denoising.
Content Encoder
To model the character-level semantics in handwriting generation, we employ
a lightweight content encoder based on three stacked ConvNeXt-V2 (Woo et al., 2023) blocks.
The input to this encoder is a sequence of padded character embeddings with a dimensionality
of 512. Each ConvNeXt-V2 block consists of a depthwise 1D convolution with kernel size 7 to
capture local context, followed by a LayerNorm layer and a two-layer feedforward subnetwork with
GELU activation and Global Response Normalization (GRN). Residual connections are applied to
stabilize training and preserve lower-level features. This architectural design enables the encoder to
effectively extract local and contextual dependencies among character tokens, resulting in content-
aware features that are well aligned with the latent space representation used by the diffusion model.
DiT Backbone
The InkDiT backbone operates entirely within a 384-dimensional latent space.
During each denoising step, it receives three conditional inputs: the noised latent representation
xt ∈Rl×384, a style condition feature xref ∈Rl×384, and the content feature derived from the
ConvNeXt-based encoder. These inputs are fused through a mixing operation and subsequently
projected to a 896-dimensional joint space using a linear layer. The resulting fused representation is
then passed into a 16-layer Transformer model that follows the standard design of multi-head self-
attention and feedforward networks. Each Transformer block incorporates adaptive normalization
and gated residual connections modulated by timestep embeddings, enabling the model to perform
time-aware denoising. This design facilitates joint reasoning over content semantics, spatial layout,
and temporal dynamics within a unified generative framework.
Diffusion Process
The diffusion process follows a cosine noise schedule with T
= 1000
timesteps. Instead of predicting the noise, InkDiT is trained to directly estimate the denoised la-
tent variable x0, following the DDPM-style parameterization. During inference, DDIM (Song et al.,
2020) sampling with 5 steps is used to efficiently generate the final latent output.
The complete training and inference procedures are summarized in Algorithm 1. During training, the
model learns to recover x0 from its noisy version xt, conditioned on both textual input and reference
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
trajectory. To further improve generation quality, we apply lightweight DDIM-specific fine-tuning,
where the model is supervised to predict ˆx0 at intermediate steps by unrolling a few DDIM iterations.
This enhances fidelity with minimal computational overhead. In inference, generation starts from
Gaussian noise at t = T and iteratively denoises via DDIM updates, producing a coherent and
stylistically aligned latent sequence that is ultimately decoded into an online handwriting trajectory.
B.3
TRAINING CONFIGURATION
For InkVAE, all components—including the sequence encoder, sequence decoder, and two regular-
ization classifiers—are jointly optimized with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4, β = (0.9, 0.99), and a
weight decay of 1 × 10−4. To stabilize training, we apply gradient clipping with a maximum norm
of 5.0. For InkDiT, we adopt the same settings but use a smaller learning rate of 7.5 × 10−5 and
a stricter gradient clipping norm of 1.0. In both cases, the learning rate schedule combines a 5%
linear warm-up phase followed by cosine decay, implemented using the LambdaLR scheduler in
PyTorch. All models are trained from scratch on 4×NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs. Training InkVAE
takes about 16 hours, whereas InkDiT training requires roughly 3 days. We employ the AdamW
optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) for both stages of training.
B.4
EVALUATION METRICS
To evaluate the readability and correctness of generated text lines, we adopt Accurate Rate (AR)
and Correct Rate (CR) as defined in Equations 7 and 8. Following (Liu et al., 2011), Nt is the total
number of ground-truth characters; De, Se, and Ie denote the numbers of deletion, substitution, and
insertion errors, respectively. Specifically, we train a text-line OCR recognition model solely on the
training set, which still achieves a high accuracy of 97.62% when directly evaluated on the test set.
The model adopts the encoder of InkVAE as the backbone, followed by a character classification
head, and is subsequently used to evaluate the textual accuracy of generated handwriting samples.
AR = (Nt −De −Se −Ie)
Nt
× 100%
(7)
CR = (Nt −De −Se)
Nt
× 100%
(8)
The text-line DTW (Berndt & Clifford, 1994) distance is computed over the (x, y) coordinate se-
quences of each full text line and normalized by the length of the corresponding ground-truth tra-
jectory, following the formulation in Equation 9. Here, N is the number of test samples, |xgt
i |
denotes the length of the i-th ground-truth trajectory, and DTW(·) is efficiently computed using the
torch-fastdtw library.
Norm-DTW = DTW(xgt
i , xpred
i
)
|xgt
i |
(9)
The style score is obtained by feeding the generated text lines into a style classifier, predicting
their corresponding writer identities. To this end, we train a 100-class writer identification model
on the testing set, which achieves a classification accuracy of 99.9% on the test set, demonstrating
its strong discriminative ability for style evaluation. The style classifier consists of the encoder of
InkVAE followed by a writer classification head. Besides, generation efficiency (Avg. char/s) is
evaluated as the average number of characters generated per second. All methods are tested with a
batch size of 1 on the same NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. The average generation speed is computed
by dividing the total number of generated characters by the elapsed time, excluding data loading and
other preprocessing operations.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Writer-1
Writer-3
Writer-4
Text Line “他同时也是一位非常虔诚的基督徒”
“的极具萎缩，是困扰长江中下游地区的”
“政府成立了成吉思汗管理局，达尔扈”
Writer-2
Figure 10: Same text across different styles. Generating the same text in different styles shows
that DiffInk captures distinct style variations while maintaining intra-writer consistency.
Style-1
Style-2
Style-3
Style-4
带有盘状饰物。好的头部则有着独特
院教授舒振邦。研究院向天明等人组成。他们在
DiffInk
DiffInk
Text
Reference
Text
Reference
DiffInk
Text
Reference
向洞里走去，甭看郭增堂已经五十
Style-5
Style-6
Figure 11: Multi-style input. DiffInk can take two style references simultaneously and, conditioned
on the given text, generate handwriting that blends characteristics of both styles, enabling control-
lable style manipulation.
C
MORE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
C.1
STYLE CONTROL AND CONSISTENCY
Style Consistency
As illustrated in the Figure 10, we showcase generated text lines from four
writers in the test set. Each writer is conditioned on the same textual content to generate handwrit-
ing samples in their respective styles. Horizontally, despite the variation in content, the generated
samples from the same writer exhibit strong stylistic consistency. For example, writer 1 consistently
produces slanted layouts from the lower left to the upper right. Vertically, given the same content
input, samples generated in different styles show clear variations in both layout and writing traits,
such as overall length, character size, and spatial arrangement.
Style Control
DiffInk is capable of handling style-mixing inputs, allowing the model to generate
handwriting that interpolates between multiple reference styles. As illustrated in the Figure 11,
given two style examples and a target text string, the model synthesizes pen-trajectory sequences
that simultaneously reflect structural consistency with the textual content and stylistic characteristics
drawn from both references.
C.2
MORE COMPARISONS WITH EXISTING METHODS
We provide additional comparisons with existing approaches, including Drawing (Zhang et al.,
2017), Deepiminator (Zhao et al., 2020), WLU (Tang & Lian, 2021), SDT (Dai et al., 2023), and
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
OLHWG (Ren et al., 2025). As illustrated in Figure 12 and Figure 13, our method delivers superior
text-line generation quality over a broader spectrum of handwriting styles.
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 1
涌入黄河,从小西湖大桥附近开始,黄河南岸的半幅河面形成了一个
北京市交管局提供的一组数字显示,今年1月至5月,12岁以下儿
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 2
袁力表示,根据实际情况,可能会对基础费率做出调整。而根据《条例》
Cerberus资本管理公司出资74亿美元收购未来克莱斯勒80.1%股权
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 3
据美国《防务新闻》网站报道,日前,负责亚太事务的美国防部副
日本三得利公司日前宣布开发出一种利用植物净化水质的新方法,
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
Figure 12: More visual comparisons with SOTA methods. DiffInk generates more natural text-
line results, while the red boxes highlight unnatural character connections.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 4
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 5
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
SDT
OLHWG
DiffInk
(Ours)
Target
WLU
Text
Writer Style 6
Deep
Iminator
Drawing
节能减排力度,力争年内实现主要污染物二氧化硫比上年减排20%
农业部副部长牛盾8日表示,当前在经济全球化大背景下,我国棉花产业
盖保罗1996年被任命为欧莱雅(中国)有限公司总裁。他通过
“硫酸根吸附剂及其处理工艺可以有效解决我国煤矿
量大约比冥王星大27%,是目前已知最大的矮行
首先登场的是宝瓶座厄塔流星雨,5月6日流星雨极盛,为正在
Figure 13: More visual comparisons with SOTA methods. DiffInk generates more natural text-
line results, while the red boxes highlight unnatural character connections.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
C.3
MORE RESULTS GENERATED BY DIFFINK
In Figure 14, we present additional results generated by DiffInk. We randomly sample eight writers
from the test set and generate multiple text lines for each of them. Visual inspection reveals that the
generated text lines from the same writer exhibit consistent local stroke patterns and global layout
styles, while clear stylistic differences emerge across different writers. These results demonstrate
that DiffInk effectively captures inter-writer style variation, and that our lightweight style classifica-
tion strategy improves the model’s ability to generalize across styles. Moreover, the generated text
lines also maintain high content accuracy and readability, further validating the effectiveness of the
proposed DiffInk framework.
Text: 的呆坏账增多等一系列连锁反应,从而影响经济和金融的
Text: 管理论坛”更名为“世界经济论坛”,也称达沃斯论
Text: 这是一个经常被提及的话题,但在实践中,这又是一个未及
Text: 《条例》规定,调整保险费率的幅度较大的,保监会应
Text: 但是,相较传统的纸质阅读,通过网络及电视等媒体进行
Text: 经营、管理上存在什么问题,最终的结局如果是走进监狱,
Text: 现今不到短短三个月的时间,消息就已变成现实,这样的高效率
Text: 罪被捕入狱的人数不断增多,此方面的报道也屡屡见诸报端。
Text: 5月的苍穹好戏连台,公众不但可以观赏到宝瓶座厄塔流星雨
Text: 62亿年前就已存在,比科学家此前认为的早5亿年。
Text: 的要强得多。这就是说,磁气圈当时强到足以保护地球免
Text: 基因库,于1992年列⼊《国际重要湿地名录》。保护区内⽔⽣植被丰富,⼤
Text: 出。信知生男恶,反是生女好。生女犹得嫁比邻,生男埋
Text: 同是天涯沦落人,相逢何必曾相识。我从去年辞帝京,谪居卧病浔
Text: 梦少年事,梦啼妆泪红阑干。我闻琵琶已叹息,又闻此语重唧唧
Text: 然。自叙少小时欢乐事,今漂沦憔悴,转徙于江湖间。予出官二年,
Text: 湖南时提出,要将洞庭湖主湖面恢复到解放初期
Text: 理学家已进行了地震和地磁测量,以探测这块鲜为人知的
Text: 期,第272窟就是这一时期的代表作。记者从敦煌研究院了
Text: 这块海底大陆被称为克尔格伦高原,大小约等于德国
Text: 赵高是第一流的书法家、文字学家,也是精通法律的专
Text: 他体魄高大强壮,骑术车技精湛,武艺非同寻常,是秦帝国宫
Text: 23号演习实兵验证阶段将于5月14日起展开。值得注意的是
Text: 兰进行海空联合截击的精密武器射击;中部将在台中港与
Writer Style 1
Writer Style 2
Writer Style 3
Writer Style 4
Writer Style 5
Writer Style 6
Writer Style 7
Writer Style 8
Text: 是夕始觉有迁谪意。因为长句,歌以赠之,凡六百一十六言,命曰《琵琶行》
Text:京城女,家在虾蟆陵下住。十三学得琵琶成,名属教坊第一部。
Text:流雪山。好为庐山谣,兴因庐山发。闲窥石镜清我心,谢公行
Text:平生不得意。低眉信手续续弹,说尽心中无限事。轻拢慢捻抹
Text: 的重大任务。我们要从贯彻落实科学发展观、构建社会主义和谐
Text: 年非洲开发银行集团理事会年会开幕式,并发表讲话
Text:有骨质疏松家族史者易患骨质疏松症。对骨峰值的建立,遗传因
Text:摩过程中也会适当地激活血液的流通,刺激神经末梢,
Figure 14: More generation results by DiffInk (Ours). DiffInk is capable of producing diverse
handwritten long text lines, exhibiting high consistency within the same style and clear distinctions
across different styles.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 4: DDIM sampling–step analysis of DiffInk, illustrating the trade-off between generation
quality and inference speed.
Sample Steps
AR% ↑
CR% ↑
Style ↑
DTW ↓
Time Cost
1
36.23
36.39
35.85
1.028
0.2x
2
79.70
80.00
66.31
1.022
0.4x
3
89.93
90.19
73.51
1.026
0.6x
4
93.16
93.39
76.47
1.040
0.8
5 (Ours)
94.38
94.58
77.38
1.052
1x
6
94.86
95.01
77.69
1.058
1.2x
10
95.35
95.52
78.32
1.067
2.0x
15
95.36
95.56
79.10
1.068
3.0x
20
95.27
95.47
79.16
1.076
4.0x
C.4
DDIM SAMPLING STEPS EVALUATION
To evaluate the impact of DDIM sampling steps on generation performance, we conducted an ad-
ditional experiment. As shown in the table 4, We observe that the performance of DDIM sampling
continues to improve as the number of steps increases from 1 to 5. However, when the number
of steps exceeds 10, the gains in content and style scores become marginal, while the DTW value
increases and the sampling cost grows significantly. Therefore, we adopt 5-step DDIM sampling in
this paper as a practical trade-off between generation quality and computational efficiency.
D
DISCUSSION
D.1
COMPARISON WITH TWO-STAGE METHODS
As illustrated in Figure 15, conventional two-stage methods decouple character generation from
layout prediction and rely on additional post-processing to stitch characters together, which often
results in less coherent text lines. In contrast, our proposed DiffInk models content, style, and layout
within a unified framework, enabling genuine end-to-end generation that produces text lines with
more natural character connections and globally consistent layouts.
Stage 1: Handwriting Font Generation 
Stage 2: Text Line Layout Modeling
Ours One-Stage Text Line
Handwriting Generation
Style reference
年
接
替
退
休
…
Characters: 
Style Reference
DiffInk(Ours)
Character Handwriting
Text: “面纱”。它将于2013年接替退休的哈勃望远镜，帮助科学家观
(a)
(b)
…
…
post-processing
Character-by-Character 
Font Generation
Character B-Box 
Predicted by LSTM
Figure 15: Comparison with character–layout decoupled approaches: (a) a two-stage pipeline
combining handwritten font generation with layout post-processing; (b) DiffInk, which takes text
and a style reference to directly output complete text lines. Unlike the two-stage pipeline, DiffInk
generates more natural character connections rather than mechanically stitching bounding boxes.
D.2
IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFINK
In the main experiments, we use a continuous reference segment from each text line as the style
reference, both for convenient sampling and to evaluate whether the model can generate layouts that
follow the trend of this given reference. This setting is adopted for convenient comparison with
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
“Ashmodeus told him”
“Smith gave him his”
“theme dear to his heart,”
“and only his own lands of”
“to another room. Simon”
“that neither sticky bands”
“sure blow your whiskers off”
“Richard Seaver. The play was”
Figure 16: Results on the IAM test set. DiffInk generates English text lines with consistent style
and accurate content. The top row shows generated results, and the bottom row shows the corre-
sponding target samples.
Table 5: Recognition performance on ICDAR13 (Yin et al., 2013) with and without our synthesized
data. Adding synthetic text lines improves AR and CR by 8.5 and 8.6 points, demonstrating both
the effectiveness and quality of the generated data.
OCR Model
Training Data
CR ↑
AR ↑
CNN+Transformer
Real data only (Baseline)
83.9
84.2
+ DiffInk Synth (Ours)
89.6
90.0
GLRNet (Peng et al., 2021)
Real data only (Baseline)
86.2
86.6
+ DiffInk Synth (Ours)
90.9
91.1
recent SOTA methods (Ren et al., 2025), which feed the layouts of the first ten characters of a real
text line into the model; the model then predicts the positions and sizes of subsequent characters
based on the reference layout, the input character content, and an average character-size prior. To
ensure a fair comparison, we instead provide the continuous handwritten trajectory segment of the
real text line—containing both style and layout information—as input to our model. For the other
compared methods, the same reference segment is used as the style condition. The corresponding
character bounding boxes of this reference are fed into the OLHWG layout prediction module as
prompts, and the final text-line results are obtained by scaling the generated characters according
to the predicted bounding boxes. Finally, line-level metrics—including content scores, style scores,
and DTW distance—are computed with each text line conditioned on its own reference segment.
D.3
APPLYING TO OTHER LANGUAGES
To validate the generalizability of the proposed method, we directly applied it to English text
line generation tasks and conducted experiments on the IAM-OnDB dataset. The data process-
ing pipeline remained consistent with the Chinese setup, including the use of the RDP algorithm
(with the redundancy removal parameter set to 0.5) for redundant point removal and normalization
of trajectory coordinates. The IAM-OnDB (Liwicki & Bunke, 2005) dataset contains approximately
10,000 handwritten English text line samples produced by 221 writers, featuring substantial cursive
writing. We randomly selected data from 25 writers as the test set, with the remaining data used for
training. During training, all hyperparameters remained consistent with the Chinese experimental
configuration, except for the learning rate, which was reduced to 5 × 10−5.
Figure 16 showcases several examples of DiffInk applied to English handwriting generation. The
model effectively generates text-line sequences that are both content-accurate and style-consistent,
even when the handwriting features strong cursive connections and diverse stylistic variations. These
results highlight the versatility and generalizability of the DiffInk framework across multilingual and
stylistically complex handwriting scenarios.
D.4
IMPROVING OCR PERFORMANCE WITH SYNTHETIC DATA
In practical applications, the quantity of handwriting data plays a critical role in improving OCR per-
formance. To assess the impact of our synthesized data, we use the generated text lines to augment
the original training set. For recognition, we adopt the same OCR model employed in this work
for evaluation—a CNN+Transformer architecture—as the text-line recognition backbone. In addi-
tion, we also follow the recognition model design used in GLRNet (Peng et al., 2021) and conduct
experiments under the same settings.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Our experimental results on the ICDAR13 dataset (Yin et al., 2013) are presented in Table 5. It
can be observed that the proposed generation method significantly improves the performance of the
recognition model. Specifically, after augmenting the training set with our synthesized data, the AR
and CR metrics increased by 8.5 and 8.6 percentage points, respectively. When using the recognition
model from GLRNet (Peng et al., 2021), our synthesized data further yields an average improvement
of around 4 percentage points. This demonstrates that our synthesized data can effectively mitigate
recognition degradation caused by the long-tail distribution of characters and the limited diversity of
handwriting styles, thereby substantially enhancing the representational capacity of existing datasets
and further confirming the high content and style quality of our synthetic data.
D.5
PERSONALIZED HANDWRITING GENERATION WITH DIFFINK
As a text-line handwriting generation model, DiffInk (Ours) is useful not only for producing high-
quality synthetic data for OCR systems, but also for broader generative applications such as per-
sonalized handwriting services and human–computer interaction. For example, in a personalized
handwriting generation scenario: for a given writer, only a single reference line—or even a short
trajectory of fewer than ten characters—is provided as the prompt Xref, with its corresponding
text Tref. The user then specifies a target text line Tgen, and the model generates the correspond-
ing trajectory Xgen. As shown in Figure 17, DiffInk yields text lines with coherent layouts under
this one-shot setting. To further enhance diversity, the reference trajectory Xref can be augmented
to simulate different structural layouts. Furthermore, our approach offers a promising direction for
paragraph-level generation. As illustrated in Figure 18, we present an example of a model-generated
handwritten paragraph of classical Chinese poetry. By simply concatenating the line-level results, a
complete paragraph can be obtained, further demonstrating that DiffInk can support a broad range
of handwriting-related applications.
Reference
事故和道路交通违法行为挂钩的"奖优罚劣
此前，保监会新闻发言人袁力表示，
很大程度上，各界对于储蓄”搬家”的行
经济合作与交流。随着国际形势的
正式开始实施的。根据《机动车交通事故责任
被放在纸箱多年，许多学者都不在意牛顿对
应该是敦煌莫高窟这座宏伟艺术殿堂
所不了解的事，他才会认为2060年是
时任总理朱镕基曾在视察湖南时提
到二十一世纪，有许多人对牛顿的解释有兴趣
莫拉说，这个部落有大约57名成员，是卡亚普部落
自然保护国际“成员李安妮·阿隆索说，考察
淡紫色荧光圈。除了这种紫蛙，考察队还在拿
旺季的开始。美国知名杂志《福布斯》目前评
4日报告说，一支考察队在南美国家苏里南的
Text
DiffInk
Text
Reference
DiffInk
DiffInk
Reference
Generate
Generate
Generate
Text
Figure 17: One-shot generation results. DiffInk is capable of producing text lines of arbitrary
length conditioned only on a short reference trajectory, supporting arbitrary character combinations
from the defined vocabulary. Even under this one-shot setting, the generated lines maintain both
high character accuracy and consistent writing style. Different colors denote different styles.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Reference
DiffInk
浔阳江头夜送客，枫叶荻花秋瑟瑟。
主人下马客在船，举酒欲饮无管弦。
醉不成欢惨将别，别时茫茫江浸月。
忽闻水上琵琶声，主人忘归客不发。
寻声暗问弹者谁，琵琶声停欲语迟。
移船相近邀相见，添酒回灯重开宴。
千呼万唤始出来，犹抱琵琶半遮面。
转轴拨弦三两声，未成曲调先有情。
弦弦掩抑声声思，似诉平生不得志。
低眉信手续续弹，说尽心中无限事。
Text
Generate
A text paragraph of 
classic Chinese poetry: 
Pipa Xing (The Song of 
the Pipa), Tang Dynasty, 
Bai Juyi
Figure 18: Extending handwriting generation to the paragraph level, we take classical Chinese
poetry as an example. Given a style reference, the text is input line by line to produce line-level
results, which are then concatenated to form a complete handwritten paragraph.
D.6
LIMITATIONS
While our model establishes SOTA performance on the notoriously difficult task of Chinese hand-
written text-line generation, direct application to other languages (e.g., Latin-based scripts) still
requires retraining. Exploring how to develop a unified multilingual generation model with only
minor modifications will therefore be one of our key directions for future work.
E
USE OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS (LLMS)
LLMs, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) and DeepSeek (DeepSeek-AI, 2024), were employed
solely for language polishing and minor writing refinements in this paper. They were not used for
generating ideas, designing methods, conducting experiments, analyzing results, or creating figures.
All scientific contributions, including the conception of the research problem, model development,
and experimental validation, were carried out independently by the authors.
26