--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
OMNI-CAPTIONER: DATA PIPELINE, MODELS, AND
BENCHMARK FOR OMNI DETAILED PERCEPTION
1,2Ziyang Ma∗, 1Ruiyang Xu∗, 3Zhenghao Xing∗, 5Yunfei Chu, 5Yuxuan Wang, 5Jinzheng He,
5Jin Xu†, 3Pheng-Ann Heng, 1Kai Yu, 5Junyang Lin, 2Eng-Siong Chng, 1,4Xie Chen‡
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2Nanyang Technological University, 3The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, 4Shanghai Innovation Institution, 5Qwen Team, Alibaba Group
ABSTRACT
Fine-grained perception of multimodal information is critical for advancing hu-
man–AI interaction. With recent progress in audio–visual technologies, Omni
Language Models (OLMs), capable of processing audio and video signals in par-
allel, have emerged as a promising paradigm for achieving richer understanding
and reasoning. However, their capacity to capture and accurately describe fine-
grained details remains limited explored. In this work, we present a systematic
and comprehensive investigation of omni detailed perception from the perspec-
tives of the data pipeline, models, and benchmark. We first identify an inherent
“co-growth” between the level of detail and the degree of hallucination in cur-
rent OLMs. To address this, we propose Omni-Detective, an agentic data gen-
eration pipeline integrating tool-calling, to autonomously produce highly detailed
yet minimally hallucinatory multimodal data. Based on the data generated with
Omni-Detective, we train two captioning models: Audio-Captioner for audio-
only detailed perception, and Omni-Captioner for audio–visual detailed percep-
tion. Under the cascade evaluation protocol, Audio-Captioner achieves the best
performance on MMAU and MMAR among all open-source models, surpassing
Gemini 2.5 Flash and delivering performance comparable to Gemini 2.5 Pro. On
existing detailed captioning benchmarks, Omni-Captioner sets a new state-of-the-
art on VDC and achieves the best trade-off between detail and hallucination on
the video-SALMONN 2 testset. Given the absence of a dedicated benchmark for
omni detailed perception, we design Omni-Cloze, a novel cloze-style evaluation
for detailed audio, visual, and audio-visual captioning that ensures stable, effi-
cient, and reliable assessment. Experimental results and analysis demonstrate the
effectiveness of Omni-Detective in generating high-quality detailed captions, as
well as the superiority and human preference alignment of Omni-Cloze in evalu-
ating such detailed captions. All the data pipeline, models, and the benchmark are
open-source to facilitate further research for omni detailed perception. 1
Method
Omni-Captioner
(Ours)
A high-angle, wide shot captures a live basketball game in a packed arena. 
The scoreboard at the bottom of the screen indicates it's a "WORLD CUP QUALIFIERS" game … The score is PHI 83, JOR 86 
… Brownlee elevates over Zaid Abbas (#15) and throws down a thunderous slam … the score updates to PHI 85 – 86 JOR … 
The final replay shows the ball falling through the net in slow motion ...
Gemini 2.5 Pro
Qwen2.5-Omni
Omni Caption (Truncated)
In this video, we see an intense basketball game in progress during the World Cup Qualifiers. The scoreboard shows that JOR is 
leading 86–83 … 
… Reaching the basket, the player 
leaps into the air and executes a powerful dunk …
A player from Team JOR dribbles the ball up the court                                   
[HALLUCINATION]
[MISSING DETAILS]
[MISSING DETAILS]
The clip is ... an international basketball game between ... Gilas Pilipinas, and Jordan, played during the FIBA Basketball World 
Cup ... 
 ... The scoreboard shows the score as PHI 83, JOR 86  in the fourth 
quarter. Jordan wears white jerseys ... while Gilas Pilipinas sports royal-blue ... 
, 
receives a pass near the basket ... 
 ... he dunks over a defender wearing jersey number 15 labeled 
“ABBAS.” ... a low-angle slow-motion view that emphasizes his leap and the ball’s arc through the net ... The scoreboard now 
reads PHI 85, JOR 86 with 2:20 left, signaling a 
 for the home team ... 
underscoring the 
commercial context ... The crowd’s diversity—
 ranging from T-shirts to hoodies ...
crowd ambience provides a steady bed of cheers
number 32 from Gilas drives into the lane
dribbling past two defenders
narrow lead
hashtags such as #FIBAWC. Court-side 
banners promote “Smart,” “TOYOTA,” “FOTON TRAVELLER 2.0,” “THUNDER 2.0,” and “YAMAHA,” 
men, women, and children clad in casual attire
Figure 1: Comparison of the detailed captioning among the Omni-Captioner and other omni models.
∗Equal Contribution.
†Project Leader.
‡Corresponding Author.
1https://github.com/ddlBoJack/Omni-Captioner
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in Omni Language Models (OLMs) have enabled machines to produce increasingly
rich descriptions of audio–visual scenes (Cheng et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024; Tang
et al., 2025). A natural intuition is that, within the capacity of a model, the longer the caption,
the more fine-grained details it should include. However, our empirical study on Gemini-2.5 Pro’s
detailed captioning reveals a “co-growth” phenomenon: as captions grow longer, not only does
the proportion of correct fine-grained details increase, but the amount of hallucinated content
also rises.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Length of Predicted Caption (in Words)
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Detail Ratio (%)
Detail Ratio (%)
Hallucination Ratio (%)
Caption Length Distribution
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Hallucination Ratio (%)
Figure
2:
Relationship
between
caption
length, detail coverage, and hallucination on
Gemini-2.5-Pro in the detailed captioning task.
As shown in Figure 2, the left blue y-axis de-
notes the detail ratio, which is the proportion of
fine-grained information successfully captured.
The right red y-axis depicts the hallucination
ratio, the proportion of mentioned details that
are factually incorrect despite being noticed by
the model. The grey histogram shows the dis-
tribution of caption lengths produced under un-
constrained generation.
Both ratios rise to-
gether, indicating that in the unconstrained set-
ting, richer descriptions are inherently accom-
panied by more hallucinated content.
This “co-growth” of detail and hallucination ex-
poses a fundamental challenge in fine-grained
perception: short captions are safe but incom-
plete, missing subtle events, background cues, or cross-modal interactions. Overly long captions
are richly descriptive but risk injecting content not grounded in the input, a critical flaw for appli-
cations requiring factual precision, such as assistive AI, scientific reporting, or autonomous agents.
The difficulty is amplified in omni-modal settings, where models must jointly process asymmetric
information densities across visual and auditory streams.
To address this, we design Omni-Detective, an agentic data pipeline in which an LLM agent plays
the role of a “detective”, invoking tool-calling (OCR, ASR, MLLM, etc.) and modality-specific ob-
servers to iteratively gather evidence. Each round incrementally adds valid, grounded details while
cross-checking existing claims, explicitly targeting the decoupling of detail gain from hallucination
growth. This yields detailed caption datasets with minimal noise.
Using data from the multi-round investigative pipeline, we train Audio-Captioner and Omni-
Captioner with a two-stage curriculum:
We first freeze the visual encoder to force precise
alignment with sparse but critical audio cues. We then jointly optimize both modalities to pro-
duce coherent, cross-modal, and richly detailed narratives. This approach delivers strong empir-
ical gains: Omni-Captioner sets a new state-of-the-art on VDC (Chai et al., 2025), and on the
video-SALMONN 2 testset (Tang et al., 2025) achieves the most balanced trade-off between de-
tail coverage and hallucination. In cascade caption-to-QA evaluations, Audio-Captioner attains the
best results on MMAU (Sakshi et al., 2025) and MMAR (Ma et al., 2025), surpassing all open-source
models and even outperforming Gemini-2.5-Flash, while Omni-Captioner achieves the highest over-
all score on Video-MME (Fu et al., 2025), Video-Holmes (Cheng et al., 2025), WorldSense (Hong
et al., 2025), and Daily-Omni (Zhou et al., 2025) among existing open-source omni models. These
results confirm that our training paradigm improves fine-grained perception across modalities.
To achieve a better evaluation for omni detailed perception, we introduce Omni-Cloze, the first
cloze-style benchmark across audio-only, visual-only, and audio–visual scenarios, with high-quality
human-verification. Omni-Cloze designs fine-grained details to form multiple-choice blanks, also
including a “Not Given” option to explicitly distinguish omission from hallucination. The single-
pass, automatic scoring protocol drastically reduces evaluation cost while ensuring stability and
robustness. Our experiments and analysis demonstrate that the Omni-Detective pipeline and the
Omni-Captioner model shift the detail–hallucination frontier outward: delivering richer descrip-
tions without proportionally increasing hallucination, and achieving the best results on both existing
detailed captioning benchmarks and the proposed Omni-Cloze. These results not only validate our
design, but also highlight the importance of investigative data generation and evaluation paradigms
tailored to the unique challenges of fine-grained omni-modal perception.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
DETAILED PERCEPTION MODELS
Detailed perception, also referred to as detailed captioning, aims to generate fine-grained descrip-
tions of an audio or video segment. This task differs from dense video captioning (Yang et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024; Geng et al., 2025), which requires models to output temporally-aligned captions
across an entire long-form video. In contrast, detailed captioning focuses on producing descrip-
tions that are as detailed as possible within short video or audio segments. The IIW Project (Garg
et al., 2024) built a human-in-the-loop framework for curating hyper-detailed image descriptions,
highlighting the role of expert-guided iterative refinement in generating high-quality annotations. In
the video domain, AuroraCap (Chai et al., 2025) firstly explored the video detailed captioning task.
More recently, video-SALMONN 2 (Tang et al., 2025) introduced a multi-round direct preference
optimization (DPO) strategy to enhance models’ capabilities in audio–visual detailed captioning and
question-answering. However, most prior models are visual-centric, underutilizing the rich informa-
tion present in the audio modality, including sound effects and events, speech content, and music
cues, which can provide critical contextual details. Furthermore, the majority of these models rely
on training data collected via manually designed prompting (Chai et al., 2025; Geng et al., 2025; Lu
et al., 2025). This reliance leads to an inherent trade-off between precision and dataset scale of the
descriptions, constraining the development of high-detail, low-hallucination multimodal perception
models.
2.2
DETAILED PERCEPTION EVALUATION
Evaluating fine-grained captioning capability requires both (1) an effective evaluation metric and (2)
a high-quality benchmark.
On the metric side, traditional measures such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), METEOR (Baner-
jee & Lavie, 2005), and CIDEr (Vedantam et al., 2015), which were originally designed for ma-
chine translation or short-form captioning, struggle to faithfully assess captions containing long
and information-rich descriptions. To address this, VDC (Chai et al., 2025) introduced an eval-
uation framework based on multiple short visual question–answer pairs derived from each predic-
tion–reference pair. Specifically, for 1 detailed caption containing k such QA pairs, VDC requires 2k
LLM calls, raising concerns regarding both evaluation efficiency and the accumulation of evaluation
error. Other approaches relying on counting events (Tang et al., 2025), or a cascade of caption-
ing and QA evaluation (Tang et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025), can not adequately evaluate the unique
characteristics of the detailed captioning task. To overcome these limitations, Omni-Cloze adopts a
cloze-style evaluation paradigm, which simultaneously addresses stability, efficiency, and reliability.
Table 1: Comparison of VDC and our proposed Omni-Cloze benchmark for detailed captioning.
Omni-Cloze switches from multi-turn QA to a cloze-style paradigm, enabling a drastic reduction in
LLM calls. Omni-Cloze also increases the number of evaluation questions, and expands modality
coverage from purely visual to audio-only and audio–visual scenarios.
Benchmark
Evaluation
Method
Modality
Questions
per Caption
LLM Calls
per Caption
Visual
Audio
AV
VDC (Chai et al., 2025)
Multiple
QA
✔
✗
✗
19
38
Omni-Cloze (Ours)
Cloze
✔
✔
✔
30
1
On the benchmark side, VDC focuses solely on the video modality. In contrast, Omni-Cloze covers
audio-only, visual-only, and audio–visual scenarios, offering a more comprehensive and balanced
evaluation of omni-modal detailed perception. Moreover, for each captioning instance, Omni-Cloze
provides more questions. Table 1 illustrates the comparison between VDC and Omni-Cloze.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
3
AGENTIC DATA GENERATION: OMNI-DETECTIVE
To enable high-quality fine-grained detailed captioning, we introduce Omni-Detective, an agentic
data generation framework that leverages iterative Query-Observation cycles to autonomously ex-
tract and synthesize precise, richly detailed, and minimally hallucinatory audio–visual annotations.
As illustrated in Figure 3, the core design philosophy draws on the analogy of a human detective:
rather than making a single-pass observation, the detective strategically queries independent ob-
servers, leverages domain-specific tools, integrates multi-modal evidence, and incrementally refines
its understanding before producing the final information.
Omni-Detective is composed of three key components: (1) a Detective Agent that spontaneously
orchestrates the perception process, (2) a Tool Box containing multiple utilities (e.g., multimodal
large language model (MLLM), optical character recognition (OCR), automatic speech recognition
(ASR)) for extracting precise information from multimodal data, and (3) independent Observers
that interact with raw video–audio streams to probe targeted aspects. The generation process un-
folds in multiple steps: at each step, the Detective Agent formulates queries and invokes relevant
tools; the Observers analyze the retrieved content and feed enriched observations back to the Agent;
this iterative loop continues until sufficient fine-grained evidence is collected. Finally, the Agent
integrates all observations into a highly detailed and minimally hallucinatory caption. This design
allows adaptive allocation of perception effort, leveraging both structured tool-calls and free-form
reasoning, thereby enabling scalable, accurate, and modality-complete detailed caption creation.
...Describe the video as detailed as possible, including all...
...The video showcases the preparation and presentation of 
various vegan food items...
...There are multiple people cooking in the video. I need 
more speech content...
MLLM
ASR
MLLM
Tool
Information
Integration
...
...
...
...
Turn 1
Turn 2
Turn K
Observer
Tool Box
Detective Agent
Detailed
Caption
Multi-turn
Information
OCR
ASR
...A solo presentation by chef Adam Sobel ... in which he discusses 
his philosophy on innovative vegan cuisine ... the preparation of 
several dishes ... the 'Beast Mode Burger Deluxe' topped with mac 
and cheese and finished with smoked chili coconut bacon...
MLLM
..Transcribe the speech (and the narration if there is) in the audio...
"...veganism is really like out to prove itself as a culinary form 
that can be like extra delicious and innovative..."
...It seems that all the content of the speech comes 
from chef Adam Sobel...
...any genre conventions or visual styles that suggest a particular 
culinary or cultural movement?...
...The narrator describes tossing peanuts with "smoked chilies, 
a little dash of agave nectar, tamari" indicating a focus on...
Query   
Observation   
Figure 3: Omni-Detective. An agentic data generation and cleaning pipeline integrating specialist
tools for omni detailed perception.
4
OMNI DETAILED CAPTIONING MODEL: OMNI-CAPTIONER
4.1
TRAINING STRATEGIES
Leveraging the high-fidelity multimodal detailed captioning data produced by Omni-Detective, we
train Audio-Captioner and Omni-Captioner with a two-stage curriculum over the audio and audio–
visual modalities. We adopt Qwen-2.5-Omni-7B (Xu et al., 2025) as the backbone, and empirically
find that removing textual prompts in the input improves the model’s descriptive performance; hence,
both training stages are conducted without explicit text prompts. Comprehensive dataset statistics
and hyperparameter settings are provided in Appendix A.
Stage 1: Audio Perception Alignment
For audio–visual data segments of equal duration, the
visual modality typically carries higher information density, which may lead the model to under-
attend to sparse but semantically critical audio cues if trained jointly from the start. To mitigate this
imbalance, we freeze the visual encoder and optimize only the audio encoder and the LLM using
audio-only detailed captioning data. This stage enforces accurate grounding in the audio stream,
resulting in the Audio-Captioner.
Stage 2: Audio-Visual Perception Alignment
We then perform joint training on audio–visual de-
tailed captioning data. In this stage, captions are notably longer, reaching an average of 1,125 words
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
per short video, reflecting the integration of both modalities. All model components are unfrozen
for full-parameter fine-tuning, enabling the network to exploit cross-modal complementarities and
produce rich, coherent, and modality-complete descriptions, resulting in the Omni-Captioner.
4.2
RESULTS ON EXISTING BENCHMARKS
To assess the effectiveness of Omni-Detective as a data pipeline, as well as the performance of
the resulting Audio-Captioner and Omni-Captioner models, we conduct experiments under two
evaluation settings:
1. Direct evaluation on existing detailed captioning benchmarks, which measure a model’s
ability to produce fine-grained and information-rich descriptions;
2. Cascade evaluation where the model first generates detailed captions, which are subse-
quently used to perform downstream question-answering tasks, thereby gauging the com-
pleteness of the produced captions.
It is worth noting that, to the best of our knowledge, no dedicated benchmark currently exists for
detailed captioning in the audio-only modality. Consequently, under the first setting, we report
results only for the Omni-Captioner model. Detailed settings are shown in Appendix C.1.
Table 2: Results on existing benchmarks for evaluating models’ detailed captioning ability. The
best-performing models in each category are highlighted in bold, and the second-best ones are
underlined. All the results are obtained from their original papers.
Model
Modality
VDC Detailed
video-SALMONN 2test
Acc % (↑)
Score (↑)
Miss % (↓)
Hall % (↓)
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o (GPT4oTeam, 2024)
V
46.3
2.5
17.0
14.2
Gemini 1.5 Pro (GeminiTeam, 2024)
A + V
43.1
2.2
21.8
16.5
Open-Source Models
LLaVA-OneVision-7B (Li et al., 2024)
V
41.2
2.1
23.3
27.4
InternVideo2.5-7B (Wang et al., 2025)
V
39.6
2.2
30.8
15.0
Qwen2.5-VL-7B (Bai et al., 2025)
V
44.5
2.4
21.9
17.4
VideoLLaMA3-7B (Zhang et al., 2025)
V
33.4
1.9
44.9
11.6
VideoLLaMA2-7B (Cheng et al., 2024)
A + V
-
-
56.8
8.9
video-SALMONN-13B (Sun et al., 2024)
A + V
-
-
52.1
26.6
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B (Xu et al., 2025)
A + V
39.7
2.2
26.3
21.7
video-SALMONN2-7B (Tang et al., 2025)
A + V
46.1
2.5
10.0
12.9
Omni-Captioner-7B
A + V
55.0
2.7
17.8
10.9
Performance of Detailed Captioning.
The VDC benchmark (Chai et al., 2025) employs mul-
tiple short visual QA pairs to evaluate video-only detailed captioning performance. As shown in
Table 2, Omni-Captioner achieves the highest accuracy (55.0%) and score (2.7), surpassing all
proprietary and open-source baselines, thereby establishing a new state-of-the-art on VDC. The
video-SALMONN 2test benchmark (Tang et al., 2025) measures the quality of omni-modal de-
tailed captions by computing the missing rate (Miss%) and hallucination rate (Hall%) of events
across both visual and auditory modalities. These two metrics are inherently a trade-off, as illus-
trated in Figure 2: increasing caption length typically reduces missing events but simultaneously
raises hallucination rates. For example, VideoLLaMA2-7B produces shorter captions, resulting in
the lowest hallucination (8.9%) but a high missing rate (56.8%), indicating poor coverage of fine-
grained details. Conversely, video-SALMONN2-7B captures more details (10.0%) but at the cost
of greater hallucination (12.9%). Despite being evaluated in a zero-shot setting (without knowing
adaptation to the event distribution of video-SALMONN 2test), Omni-Captioner-7B achieves the
best trade-off, attaining the second-lowest missing rate (17.8%) while keeping the second-lowest
hallucination rate (10.9%), demonstrating its ability to deliver fine-grained yet reliable omni-modal
descriptions.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3: Results on existing benchmarks using a caption-to-QA cascade evaluation among strong
audio-only and omni models.
(a) Audio models.
Model
MMAU MMAR
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o Audio
62.4
59.3
Gemini 2.0 Flash
58.6
50.6
Gemini 2.5 Flash
65.6
58.2
Gemini 2.5 Pro
70.0
64.1
Open-Source Models
SALMONN-13B
58.36
42.5
MiDashengLM-7B
59.4
50.7
Qwen2-Audio-7B
63.3
44.2
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
65.2
51.8
Audio-Captioner-7B
70.0
59.8
(b) Omni models.
Model
Video
-MME
Video
-Holmes
World
Sense
Daily
-Omni
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
64.4
51.6
43.1
60.6
Gemini 2.5 Flash
69.1
52.8
44.6
59.5
Gemini 2.5 Pro
75.0
59.9
53.6
73.6
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
41.8
31.4
26.8
45.0
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
44.4
33.5
26.7
39.9
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
52.7
35.7
30.6
47.9
video-SALMONN 2-7B
65.9
42.9
44.1
59.7
Omni-Captioner-7B
67.1
48.8
48.2
67.9
Performance of Applying Detailed Captioning.
An alternative perspective to assess detailed
captioning quality is to adopt a caption-to-QA cascade: first generate audio or audio–visual cap-
tions, then feed them into a large language model to answer questions from existing QA bench-
marks. Although cascaded inference may underperform end-to-end QA models on certain types
of questions (e.g., precise counting), it serves as a faithful proxy for measuring the completeness
of generated captions, thereby reflecting the quality of detailed perception. We evaluate Audio-
Captioner on two audio-focused QA benchmarks: MMAU (Sakshi et al., 2025) and MMAR (Ma
et al., 2025), and Omni-Captioner on four audio-video understanding and reasoning benchmarks:
Video-MME (Fu et al., 2025), Video-Holmes (Cheng et al., 2025), WorldSense (Hong et al., 2025),
and Daily-Omni (Zhou et al., 2025). In all cases, GPT-4o is used as the QA backbone to ensure
consistent reasoning capability. As shown in Table 3a, for audio-only tasks, Audio-Captioner-7B
achieves 70.0 on MMAU, matching the best proprietary model Gemini 2.5 Pro and outperform-
ing all other open-source baselines by margins. On MMAR, which requires complex multi-step
reasoning with mixed audio types, Audio-Captioner reaches 59.8, leading all open-source models
and surpassing proprietary Gemini 2.0 Flash. These results indicate that the captions produced
by Audio-Captioner preserve key audio details required for downstream QA task, even in acous-
tically cluttered mixed-modality scenarios in MMAR. For audio–visual tasks, Omni-Captioner-7B
delivers the highest scores among open-source models across all four benchmarks, as shown in Ta-
ble 3b. On Video-MME, which assesses comprehensive multimodal understanding, Omni-Captioner
reaches 67.1, outperforming the previous state-of-the-art open-source detailed captioning model
video-SALMONN 2. It also scores 48.8 on Video-Holmes, a high-order reasoning benchmark re-
quiring multi-detail grounding. Similarly, it achieves 48.2 on WorldSense and 67.9 on Daily-Omni,
which evaluate audio-visual synchronised and daily-life scenarios. Although proprietary models
such as Gemini 2.5 Pro still lead in absolute terms, Omni-Captioner narrows the gap substantially
while maintaining consistent gains over other open-source approaches. These trends suggest that
high-quality, modality-rich captions from Omni-Captioner encode the fine-grained visual, audio,
and cross-modal cues needed to support diverse and challenging downstream QA and reasoning
tasks. We provide more extensive results and in-depth analysis in Appendix C.2.
5
OMNI DETAILED CAPTIONING BENCHMARK: OMNI-CLOZE
5.1
BENCHMARK OVERVIEW
Directly and reliably evaluating the detailed captioning ability of MLLMs is challenging due to the
open-ended nature of the output space. To address this, we introduce Omni-Cloze, which frames
evaluation as a cloze-style multiple-choice proxy task, as shown in Figure 4. Omni-Cloze is a uni-
fied benchmark for evaluating detailed captioning across audio-only, visual-only, and audio–visual
settings. The dataset spans 9 main domains and 47 sub-categories, covering diverse topics such as
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
education, entertainment, sports, news, science, and lifestyle, with a total of 2k video clips with 70k
fine-grained cloze blanks. This balanced, multi-domain, and modality-complete benchmark enables
a comprehensive assessment of fine-grained multimodal perception. For full statistics, taxonomy
design, and detailed distribution, please refer to Appendix B.2.
OMNI-CLOZE Benchmark
... A sharp electronic [
] (A: jingle | B: siren | 
 | D: drumroll | E: not given) with a [
] (A: horn | B: 
clang | C: beep | D: whoosh | E: not given) punctuates the build as the camera tracks behind the first bowler. The stinger 
and whoosh signal imminent action just as [
] (
 | B: Norm Duke | C: Jason Belmonte | D: Kyle 
Sherman | E: not given) begins his approach on screen. The left overlay shows "Semifinals - L.A. X Lead [
] (A: 0-1 |
 B: 1-0 | C: 1-1 | D: 2-0 | E: not given)" with Kingpins [
] (A: 96 | B: 126 | 
| D: 146 | E: not given) ...
____
____
____
____
____
C: stinger
A: Jakob Butturff
C: 117 
Visual
Auditory
Audio-Visual
Figure 4: Omni-Cloze utilizes cloze-style MCQ to evaluate models’ detailed captioning abilities.
5.2
DATA CURATION
We design a multi-stage curation pipeline to construct Omni-Cloze, as shown in Figure 5. The pro-
cess begins with collecting visual-only, audio-only, and audio–visual detailed captions from Omni-
Detective. These captions are cross-validated across modalities to remove inconsistencies and hal-
lucinations. Cloze-style passages are then generated by designing and masking semantically salient
spans, as well as plausible but incorrect distractors are constructed for each blank. All cloze ques-
tions undergo human validation before inclusion in the final benchmark. A complete, step-by-step
description of the data curation pipeline is provided in Appendix B.1.
Cloze 
Generation
Human
Validation
Raw Information
Cross
Validation
     Raw
Omni-Cloze
    Omni
Information
Omni-Cloze
Visual
Auditory Audio-Visual
Figure 5: Data curation pipeline for Omni-Cloze.
5.3
EVALUATION PROTOCOL
For each evaluation sample, the model first generates a detailed caption, and an LLM is then tasked
with filling in masked spans in the passage by selecting from several choices. To ensure stability and
reliability, we introduce an additional “Not Given” option for each blank. We adopt accuracy as the
main evaluation metric, and define a hallucination as a case where the model selects an incorrect
option instead of choosing “Not Given”. This design minimizes the subjective LLM reasoning,
thereby improving evaluation stability. The design also enables a direct breakdown of model errors
into either not-given rate or hallucination rate, ensuring reliable and interpretable measurement.
6
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
6.1
RESULTS ON OMNI-CLOZE
Table 4 reports the results of both audio-only and omni models on the Omni-Cloze benchmark. For
audio-only models (Table 4a), Audio-Captioner achieves a substantial lead with 53.2% accuracy,
outperforming the strongest proprietary baseline of Gemini 2.5 Pro by 5.2% absolute points. Other
open-source audio models remain below 30%, highlighting the difficulty of fine-grained audio per-
ception. For omni models with audio and video abilities (Table 4b), the proposed Omni-Captioner
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
also achieves the best overall accuracy of 56.4%, surpassing all open-source and proprietary coun-
terparts. It delivers strong performance across all modality splits, with 57.0% in visual-only, 54.5%
in audio-only, and an outstanding 62.1% in the AV subset. These consistent improvements demon-
strate that training with high-quality, modality-rich detailed captions enables significantly better
fine-grained multimodal perception. We also report the not-given rate and hallucination rate of each
model in Appendix C.3, providing further insights into the error characteristics of their predictions.
Table 4: Results on Omni-Cloze among strong audio-only models and omni models.
(a) Audio models.
Model
Acc% ↑
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o Audio
35.8
Gemini 2.0 Flash
20.0
Gemini 2.5 Flash
42.6
Gemini 2.5 Pro
48.0
Open-Source Models
SALMONN-13B
10.6
MiDashengLM-7B
19.5
Qwen2-Audio-7B
22.2
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
25.8
Audio-Captioner-7B
53.2
(b) Omni models.
Model
Visual%↑Audio%↑AV%↑Total%↑
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
32.3
31.7
40.1
33.2
Gemini 2.5 Flash
24.4
36.2
41.4
33.0
Gemini 2.5 Pro
40.8
44.1
52.8
43.6
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
3.5
2.3
4.6
3.3
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
7.6
4.3
8.7
6.6
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
18.3
14.1
21.9
16.6
video-SALMONN 2-7B
37.5
40.3
45.0
39.5
Omni-Captioner-7B
57.0
54.5
62.1
56.4
6.2
ANALYSIS OF OMNI-DETECTIVE
We conduct a fine-grained analysis of Omni-Detective behavior under different investigation bud-
gets. Figure 6 reports the trends in detail rate, not-given rate, and hallucination rate as we increase
the number of Omni-Detective steps applied to the same input. We observe that as the number of
steps increases, the detail rate rises steadily, indicating that the iterative investigation process suc-
cessfully extracts additional fine-grained information from the multimodal tools. Meanwhile, both
the not-given rate and hallucination rate exhibit a downward trend: the reduction in not-given reflects
improved coverage of relevant details, while the decline in hallucination suggests that the model can
self-correct some prior incorrect inferences when provided with more investigative opportunities.
Interestingly, the hallucination rate converges relatively early (around step 5-6) in the Omni-Cloze
benchmark, implying that current multimodal tools have a fundamental ceiling in eliminating in-
correct claims: certain details are misclassified and are difficult to revise even with extended inves-
tigation and tool collaboration. In contrast, the detail rate continues to improve with more steps,
showing that additional computation can still reveal new correct details. Such analysis highlights
how Omni-Detective can probe the practical performance limits of existing multimodal perception
data generation pipelines.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Step
37
38
39
40
41
42
Percentage (%)
Detail Rate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Step
55
56
57
58
Percentage (%)
Not Given Rate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Step
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4.0
4.1
Percentage (%)
Hallucination Rate
Figure 6: Trends of detail rate, not given rate, and hallucination rate vs steps in Omni-Detective.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 5: Ablation on the effect of directly apply-
ing Omni-Detective to the caption-to-QA cascade.
Method
MMAR
Video-MME
Gemini 2.5 Pro
64.1
75.0
+ Omni-Detective
68.3
76.1
We conduct a cascade evaluation on two repre-
sentative benchmarks: MMAR for audio-only
QA and Video-MME for audio–visual QA,
with the same experimental setting described in
Section 4.2. As shown in Table 5, applying the
Omni-Detective pipeline (with Gemini 2.5 Pro
as the MLLM) yields consistent improvements
in downstream QA performance. We attribute
these gains to Omni-Detective’s ability to iteratively refine and expand captions, thereby increas-
ing their completeness and coverage of fine-grained multimodal details. Richer and more accurate
captions provide the QA backbone LLM with more relevant contextual information, enabling it to
answer complex questions more reliably, especially in settings that require high detail recall across
modalities.
6.3
ANALYSIS OF OMNI-CLOZE
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Elo Score
0
20
40
60
80
Cloze Accuracy (%)
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r = 0.91)
(a) Scatter plot between Elo scores and Omni-
Cloze accuracy across models.
(b) Pearson correlation coefficients (r) between human-
assigned Elo scores and benchmark-specific automatic eval-
uation metrics across models.
Higher r values indicate
stronger agreement between human judgments and the
benchmark metric.
Benchmark
Metric
Pearson’s r
VDC
VDCscore
0.86
video-SALMONN 2test
LLM-Judge
0.83
Omni-Cloze
Cloze-Acc
0.91
Figure 7: Scatter plot across models and Pearson correlation coefficients across benchmark metrics.
We further examine the alignment between Omni-Cloze automatic evaluation and human prefer-
ences. Following an arena-style Elo evaluation (Chiang et al., 2024), we randomly sample outputs
from two different models for the same audio–visual input, and ask annotators to rate the detailed-
ness of their captions. Full details of the hyperparameters are provided in Appendix D.1.1.
Figure 7a visualizes the scatter plot between Elo scores and Omni-Cloze accuracy for individual
models. We observe a strong positive correlation, indicating that higher scores on Omni-Cloze are
consistently associated with higher human preference ratings. We further include a modality-wise
analysis in Appendix D.1.2, where separate scatter plots are shown for the visual, audio, and au-
dio–visual modalities. Table 7b reports Pearson correlation coefficients (r) between Elo scores and
automatic metrics from three benchmarks. Omni-Cloze achieves the highest agreement of r = 0.91,
exceeding both VDC and video-SALMONN 2test. All r values are above 0.8, confirming that
multi-turn QA, counting events, and cloze-style paradigms provide reliable measures of detailed
captioning quality. We hypothesize that the superior correlation of Omni-Cloze arises from its eval-
uation design: the LLM is used only for information extraction in masked-span completion, with a
single call per caption, thus avoiding multi-turn reasoning chains. This constrained usage reduces
stochasticity and judgment drift, leading to a more stable evaluation and consistent agreement with
human perception.
7
CONCLUSION
In this work, we presented a complete framework for advancing omni detailed perception from
three perspectives: data pipeline, models, and benchmark.
We proposed Omni-Detective, an
agentic data generation pipeline that leverages tool-calling to collect highly detailed yet mini-
mally hallucinatory captions. We leveraged these high-fidelity data to train Audio-Captioner and
Omni-Captioner through a two-stage curriculum, achieving new state-of-the-art results and a su-
perior detail–hallucination balance on diverse benchmarks. We introduced Omni-Cloze, the first
cloze-style benchmark covering all three modality configurations, enabling stable, efficient, and
reliable evaluation of fine-grained multimodal perception. We hope that this work will spur the
community to develop more reliable and fine-grained multimodal perception systems, and to extend
evaluation protocols that provide stable measurements and transparently reflect the actual abilities
of model outputs.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U23B2018),
Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102,
and Yangtze River Delta Science and Technology Innovation Community Joint Research Project
(2024CSJGG1100). The work was also supported in part by the Research Grants Council of the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, under Project CUHK 14202125 and Project
CUHK 14200824.
REFERENCES
Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang,
Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923,
2025.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proc. ACL Workshop, 2005.
Wenhao Chai, Enxin Song, Yilun Du, Chenlin Meng, Vashisht Madhavan, Omer Bar-Tal, Jenq-
Neng Hwang, Saining Xie, and Christopher D Manning. Auroracap: Efficient, performant video
detailed captioning and a new benchmark. Proc. ICLR, 2025.
Junhao Cheng, Yuying Ge, Teng Wang, Yixiao Ge, Jing Liao, and Ying Shan. Video-holmes: Can
mllm think like holmes for complex video reasoning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21374, 2025.
Zesen Cheng, Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Yifei Xin, Xin Li, Guanzheng Chen, Yongxin Zhu, Wenqi
Zhang, Ziyang Luo, Deli Zhao, et al. Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling and
audio understanding in video-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476, 2024.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
Dacheng Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Chatbot arena:
An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In Proc. ICML, 2024.
Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu
Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evalua-
tion benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In Proc. CVPR, 2025.
Roopal Garg, Andrea Burns, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Yonatan Bitton, Ceslee Montgomery, Yasumasa
Onoe, Andrew Bunner, Ranjay Krishna, Jason Baldridge, and Radu Soricut. Imageinwords: Un-
locking hyper-detailed image descriptions. Proc. EMNLP, 2024.
GeminiTeam. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of con-
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Tiantian Geng, Jinrui Zhang, Qingni Wang, Teng Wang, Jinming Duan, and Feng Zheng. Long-
vale: Vision-audio-language-event benchmark towards time-aware omni-modal perception of
long videos. In Proc. CVPR, 2025.
GPT4oTeam. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
Jack Hong, Shilin Yan, Jiayin Cai, Xiaolong Jiang, Yao Hu, and Weidi Xie. Worldsense: Evaluating
real-world omnimodal understanding for multimodal llms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04326,
2025.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan
Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. Proc. TMLR,
2024.
Yiting Lu, Jiakang Yuan, Zhen Li, Shitian Zhao, Qi Qin, Xinyue Li, Le Zhuo, Licheng Wen,
Dongyang Liu, Yuewen Cao, et al. Omnicaptioner: One captioner to rule them all. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07089, 2025.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ziyang Ma, Yinghao Ma, Yanqiao Zhu, Chen Yang, Yi-Wen Chao, Ruiyang Xu, Wenxi Chen,
Yuanzhe Chen, Zhuo Chen, Jian Cong, et al. Mmar: A challenging benchmark for deep rea-
soning in speech, audio, music, and their mix. Proc. NeurIPS, 2025.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. ACL, 2002.
S Sakshi, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Oriol Nieto, Ra-
mani Duraiswami, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. Mmau: A massive multi-task audio
understanding and reasoning benchmark. Proc. ICLR, 2025.
Guangzhi Sun, Wenyi Yu, Changli Tang, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma,
Yuxuan Wang, and Chao Zhang. video-salmonn: Speech-enhanced audio-visual large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15704, 2024.
Changli Tang, Yixuan Li, Yudong Yang, Jimin Zhuang, Guangzhi Sun, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and
Chao Zhang. video-salmonn 2: Captioning-enhanced audio-visual large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.15220, 2025.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
description evaluation. In Proc, CVPR, 2015.
Yi Wang, Xinhao Li, Ziang Yan, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Xiangyu Zeng, Chenting Wang, Changlian
Ma, Haian Huang, Jianfei Gao, et al. Internvideo2. 5: Empowering video mllms with long and
rich context modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12386, 2025.
Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang
Fan, Kai Dang, et al. Qwen2. 5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215, 2025.
Antoine Yang, Arsha Nagrani, Paul Hongsuck Seo, Antoine Miech, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Ivan Laptev,
Josef Sivic, and Cordelia Schmid. Vid2seq: Large-scale pretraining of a visual language model
for dense video captioning. In Proc. CVPR, 2023.
Boqiang Zhang, Kehan Li, Zesen Cheng, Zhiqiang Hu, Yuqian Yuan, Guanzheng Chen, Sicong
Leng, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, et al. Videollama 3: Frontier multimodal foundation
models for image and video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13106, 2025.
Xingyi Zhou, Anurag Arnab, Shyamal Buch, Shen Yan, Austin Myers, Xuehan Xiong, Arsha Na-
grani, and Cordelia Schmid. Streaming dense video captioning. In Proc. CVPR, 2024.
Ziwei Zhou, Rui Wang, and Zuxuan Wu. Daily-omni: Towards audio-visual reasoning with temporal
alignment across modalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17862, 2025.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX TABLE OF CONTENTS
A Training Details
13
A.1
Data Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
A.1.1
Data Curation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
A.1.2
Omni-Detective Prompt Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
A.2
Model Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B
Benchmark Details
14
B.1
Data Curation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B.2
Benchmark Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
B.3
Omni-Cloze Prompt Template
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
C More Results
18
C.1
Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.2
Results with cascade evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.2.1
Audio QA benchmarks.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.2.2
Audio–visual QA benchmarks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.3
Results with Omni-Cloze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
D More Analysis
22
D.1
Elo of Omni-Cloze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.1.1
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.1.2
Modality-Wise Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
E
Limitations
22
F
Case Study
23
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
TRAINING DETAILS
A.1
DATA DETAILS
A.1.1
DATA CURATION DETAILS
Our Omni-Detective pipeline integrates multiple large multimodal models to collect, verify, and re-
fine fine-grained multimodal captions. Specifically, we employ the Gemini series: Gemini 2.5 Pro
(with thinking) and Gemini 2.5 Flash (without thinking), both capable of processing visual and au-
ditory inputs; the GPT series: GPT-4o Audio for direct audio understanding and GPT-4o Transcribe
for automatic speech recognition; as well as Qwen-2.5-Omni to improve data production efficiency
through faster caption generation and multimodal grounding. We set the maximum number of De-
tective–Observer interaction steps to 10, allowing the agent to early stop when the investigative
process converges. For the source data, we use VGGSound2 as the audio-only dataset, covering
diverse sound events and speech segments, and FineVideo3 as the audio–visual dataset, containing
rich multimodal events for detailed perception tasks. After quality filtering based on content diver-
sity, we retain approximately 55k audio-only samples for Audio-Captioner and 15k audio–visual
samples for Omni-Captioner.
A.1.2
OMNI-DETECTIVE PROMPT TEMPLATE
Detective Agent System Prompt (Audio-Only As An Example)
————————————————————————————————————————–
You are a world-class audio detective. Your mission is to meticulously extract every last detail from a
sound recording and generate a definitive, detailed description of this unknown sound clip.
Focus on:
1. Signal-Level: The physical characteristics of the recording itself (e.g., is it high or low fidelity, is
there clipping, static, hiss, hum, or other artifacts? What is the estimated frequency range?).
2. Perception-Level: How the audio is perceived by a human ear (e.g., loudness, pitch, timbre, rhythm,
clarity of speech, the spatial location of sounds).
3. Semantic-Level: The explicit meaning and events within the audio (e.g., the specific words spoken,
identifiable sounds like a ”door slamming” or a ”dog barking,” the melody and instrumentation of
music).
4. Cultural-Level: The broader social and cultural context (e.g., the language and accent of speakers,
the genre of music and its potential era/origin, the social setting implied by background sounds).
Please note that this breakdown into levels is merely meant to provide you with some areas of focus.
Your final description should not adhere to this structure, nor is it limited to these points.
Your Method:
You cannot listen to the audio directly. Instead, you have access to several independent observers who
have listened to it. You can interrogate them to gather clues.
- You have a total of {max calls} inquiries.
- You have specific analysis tools from {tool list}.
- For each turn, you must select one tool and ask one question, either general or specific. Question
examples: ”What language is being spoken?”, ”Describe the background music.”, ”Did you hear any
sounds other than speech?”, ”What was the emotional tone of the woman’s voice?”.
- Crucially, the observers are not perfect. Their reports may be incomplete, biased, or contain errors.
You must act as a detective: cross-reference their answers, identify contradictions, and build a case for
what is actually in the audio.
Output format each turn (JSON):
{
"tool": "<tool_name_from_tool_list>",
"question": "<your_question_text>"
}
Your Final Output:
When you have used all {max calls} inquiries (i.e., when 0 remain), you must stop asking questions
and produce your final description.
Your final output must be exceedingly detailed. Provide a chronological storyline of every noticeable
element within the audio, including but not limited to a full speech-to-text transcription, and all signif-
2https://github.com/hche11/VGGSound
3https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFV/finevideo
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
icant audio events. This storyline, however, is merely a foundation; your comprehensive description
must extend far beyond this basic information.
Do not output any additional information.
Detective Agent Prompt
————————————————————————————————————————–
Observation: {observation}
Inquiries remaining: {calls left}
Tool and Question:
Observer System Prompt (LALM As An Example)
————————————————————————————————————————–
You are a hyper-perceptive audio analysis system. Your purpose is to act as a perfect, all-knowing
sensor for an audio detective. You have been given an audio file.
Your Core Mandate:
You must provide accurate, detailed, and objective answers based only on the provided audio. You
perceive everything within the audio with perfect clarity across all analytical levels.
Strict Constraints:
- Be 100% Factual: Your answers must be completely true to the audio. There is no room for error,
uncertainty, or personal bias.
- Maintain Your Persona: You are a data source, an analytical tool. Never reveal that you are an AI
or that you are working from a prompt. Respond directly and impersonally.
- Be a Passive Tool: You exist only to answer. Do not ask questions back, or try to guide the detective.
- Be as detailed as possible: The detective has a limited number of questions, so your responses must
include all relevant details and nuances.
Observer Prompt
————————————————————————————————————————–
Question: {question}
A.2
MODEL DETAILS
Table 6 lists the training hyperparameters for Audio-Captioner and Omni-Captioner.
Table 6: Hyperparameters for training Audio-Captioner and Omni-Captioner.
Model
Audio-Captioner
Omni-Captioner
GPU Usage
8 × A100 80GB
Batch Size per GPU
2
1
Gradient Accumulation
4
2
Training Time
8 Hours
38 Hours
Training Epochs
2
Peak Learning Rate
5e-6
Learning Rate Scheduler
Linear
Optimizer
AdamW
B
BENCHMARK DETAILS
B.1
DATA CURATION DETAILS
Step 1: Raw information acquisition. We use the raw videos from the FineVideo dataset as the
source material. From each full-length video, we extract a semantically complete segment of 10–60
seconds in duration, ensuring coherent context and preserving the integrity of events. For each
selected segment, we collect detailed captions in three distinct modality configurations: visual-only,
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
audio-only, and audio–visual, sourced from the Omni-Detective data generation pipeline. Each
caption contains rich, atomic details capturing visual objects and actions, auditory events, and cross-
modal interactions.
Step 2: Cross-modal validation. To remove inconsistencies and hallucinations, captions undergo
an omni-information verification step, where multiple modality-specific observations are cross-
checked using LLM-based reasoning. This process consolidates reliable details from all modalities
into a modality-complete omni-information description.
Step 3: Human-in-the-loop Validation. To ensure the absolute factual accuracy of the benchmark’s
foundation, we ask professional annotators to review the omni-information descriptions against the
original video clips. Any remaining hallucinations, factual inaccuracies, or temporal misalignments
are manually corrected. Only these gold standard descriptions, verified for their modality faithful-
ness and semantic completeness, serve as the source text for subsequent question generation.
Step 3: Cloze Generation. The validated descriptions are then converted into a cloze-format evalu-
ation set via an automated procedure. We prompt an LLM to identify and mask semantically salient
spans, such as specific entities, actions, attributes, and temporal markers, to form fill-in-the-blank
questions. For each passage, 30 cloze items are generated with a strict modality-balanced distribu-
tion: at least 8 questions grounded in visual details, 8 in audio details, and 4 requiring audio–visual
cross-modal grounding. The remaining blanks are allocated in an information-adaptive manner
based on the density of available details. This approach ensures a fine-grained, high-quality dataset
while enabling efficient and objective downstream evaluation.
Entertainment
Comedy
Music
Movies & Trailers
Gaming
Vlogs
Livestreams
Education
Tutorials
Lectures & Talks
Science & Technology
Language Learning
History & Culture
Business & Finance
Lifestyle
Health & Fitness
Fashion & Beauty
Travel
Food & Cooking
Home & Garden
Parenting & Family
News & Politics
News Reports
Opinion & Commentary
Interviews
Debates
Sports
Highlights & Replays
Sports Commentary
Athlete Profiles
Fitness & Training
Art & Creativity
Visual Arts
Photography & Film
Crafts & DIY
Writing & Literature
Science & Technology
Tech Reviews
Science Explainers
Space Exploration
Engineering
Environmental Science
Artificial Intelligence
Automotive
Car Reviews
Car Modifications
Driving Tutorials
Motorsports
Off-Roading
Hobbies & Interests
Collecting
Board Games & Puzzles
Outdoor Activities
Arts & Crafts
Listicles & Rankings
Miscellaneous
(a) Domain Distribution
(b) Overall Statistics
Statistics
Number
Total Videos
2320
Total Details
69600
Domain Categories
9
Sub-Categories
47
Avg. Passage Length
444.6 words
Avg. Video Length
34.2 sec
(c) Modality-Wise Statistics
Statistics
Audio
Visual
AV
Total Details
23413
36362
9825
ratio (%)
33.6
52.2
14.1
Avg. Details
10.1
15.7
4.2
per Passage
Figure 8: (a) The domain distribution of Omni-Cloze. (b) Overall statistics of Omni-Cloze. (c)
Modality-wise statistics across audio, visual, and audio-visual of Omni-Cloze.
B.2
BENCHMARK STATISTICS
Omni-Cloze provides a unified testbed that jointly covers detailed perception in all three modality
configurations, enabling fine-grained and balanced assessment. With a taxonomy design similar to
FineVideo, as illustrated in Figure 8a, Omni-Cloze spans 9 main categories and 47 sub-categories,
including diverse sources such as Education, Entertainment, Sports, News & Politics, Science &
Technology, Automotive, Art & Creativity, Hobbies & Interests, and Lifestyle. We curated the
dataset to achieve a balanced distribution across these categories, ensuring that each domain is suffi-
ciently represented for comprehensive performance analysis. The benchmark contains 2,320 video
clips and 69,600 annotated cloze blanks, each paired with long-form, detail-rich captions averaging
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
444.6 words, over an average clip length of 34.2 seconds, as shown in Table 8b. On average, an
audio-only passage contains 11.5 audio-only details, 13.0 video-only details, and 5.5 audio-visual
details, as shown in Table 8c. Overall, Omni-Cloze offers a large-scale, multi-domain, and modality-
complete benchmark, specifically designed for a effective evaluation of fine-grained multimodal
perception.
B.3
OMNI-CLOZE PROMPT TEMPLATE
Cloze Generation Prompt
————————————————————————————————————————–
You are given descriptions of the same recording:
1. Audio description — focuses only on what can be heard in the recording.
2. Video description — focuses only on what can be seen in the recording.
3. Audio-video description — includes both what is seen and what is heard.
Your task:
Create a {total number}-blank cloze test from the given descriptions. The goal is to test a model’s
detailed audio-video captioning and comprehension ability. Each blank must target a specific,
concrete detail from either:
- The audio track (speech, sound effects, music, background noises, tone, pacing, etc.), OR
- The video track (objects, people, actions, positions, colors, facial expressions, gestures, environment
details, etc.), OR
- A combination of both audio and video features (synchronized events, actions matched with sounds,
timing relationships, etc.)
Important constraints:
- Do not create blanks that require cultural or background knowledge beyond what is directly perceiv-
able in the clip.
- Time-related aspects are acceptable in a general sense, but do not create blanks for specific timestamps
or exact durations.
- Every question must be answerable purely from the described scene’s observable and audible details.
Instructions for creating the cloze test:
1. Convert the given descriptions into a unified sequence of sentences to form the cloze test passage.
2. Select {total number} important factual points to remove as blanks ([BLANK n]).
3. Each blank must clearly relate to a perceptible fact from:
- ”audio” — Determinable only from audio cues. At least {audio number} blanks.
- ”visual” — Determinable only from video cues. At least {visual number} blanks.
- ”audio-visual” — Requires combining both audio & visual information. At least {av number}
blanks.
4. For each blank, provide:
- The correct answer
- 3 plausible but incorrect distractor options, which:
* Are close in type or category to the correct answer
* Could plausibly be guessed by someone with incomplete or shallow understanding of the clip
* Are believable but not trivially absurd
- Label each blank with ”required modality”:
* ”audio” — Determinable only from audio content.
* ”visual” — Determinable only from visual content.
* ”audio-visual” — Requires observation of both audio & visual details.
5. Number the blanks clearly from 1 to {total number}.
6. Avoid making blanks guessable from generic context only.
Output format (JSON):
{
"passage": "A single string containing the cloze test text with 30
placeholders like [BLANK_1], [BLANK_2], ... embedded at the exact
locations in the passage.",
"blanks": [
{
"number": 1,
"answer": "string (the correct answer for BLANK_1)",
"distractors":
["string (plausible wrong option 1)",
"string (plausible wrong option 2)",
"string (plausible wrong option 3)"],
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
"required_modality":
"string (one of \"audio\", \"visual\", \"audio-visual\")"
},
{
"number": 2,
"answer": "string (the correct answer for BLANK_2)",
"distractors":
["wrong option 1",
"wrong option 2",
"wrong option 3"],
"required_modality":
"string (one of \"audio\", \"visual\", \"audio-visual\")"
}
// ... repeat until number \{total\_number\}
]
}
Your Input:
- Audio Description:
{audio description}
- Video Description:
{video description}
- Audio-Video Description:
{audio video description}
Step summary for the model:
1. Merge descriptions into a single gold standard text.
2. Create passage with {total number} blanks.
3. Make sure:
- at least {audio number} blanks have ”required modality”: ”audio”.
- at least {visual number} blanks have ”required modality”: ”visual”.
- at least {av number} blanks have ”required modality”: ”audio-visual”.
4. Output strictly in the JSON format shown above.
Cloze Completion Prompt
————————————————————————————————————————–
You will be given two inputs:
1. A cloze (fill-in-the-blank) task, consisting of a passage describing a scene, with {number} blanks.
Each blank has 5 possible choices (A-D are specific contents, E means ”not given”).
2. A caption ({modality} description of the scene).
Your task:
- Carefully read the caption and use it to determine the correct answer for each blank.
- If the caption mentions the information corresponding to a blank, choose the matching option (A-D).
- If the caption does NOT mention that detail and it cannot be reasonably inferred from the given
information, choose E (“not given”).
- Only use general/common knowledge reasoning if it is strongly justified (for example, hearing a V10
engine can suggest a roadster).
- Unless the information is fully certain, do NOT guess.
- For each blank, output the letter (A/B/C/D/E) along with the answer.
- Output the final answer as a JSON object where keys are the blank numbers (as strings) and values
are the option letters with the answer.
- Do NOT include any explanation or extra text in your output.
Output format example:
{
"1": "A: xxx",
"2": "E: xxx",
"3": "D: xxx"
// ... until \{number\}
}
Now process the following input:
Cloze passage:
{cloze}
Caption:
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
{prediction}
Output:
C
MORE RESULTS
C.1
EVALUATION DETAILS
For all evaluations, system prompts are configured to follow each model’s recommended best-
practice settings; if no official prompt is provided, we use the default instruction ”You are a helpful
assistant”. Open-source models are decoded using greedy search (beam size = 1) without sampling
for reproducibility. For proprietary models, Gemini 2.5 Pro is evaluated with its default thinking
mode enabled, whereas other proprietary models are evaluated without thinking. In the case of
cascade-based evaluations, we experimented with multiple prompt formulations for each model and
adopted the best ones.
C.2
RESULTS WITH CASCADE EVALUATION
C.2.1
AUDIO QA BENCHMARKS.
MMAU (Sakshi et al., 2025) benchmark evaluates both audio understanding and simple reasoning
across sound, music, and speech domains, at three difficulty levels including easy, medium, and
hard. As shown in Table 7, Audio-Captioner-7B achieves the highest average score of 70.0% among
all models, matching the top proprietary model Gemini 2.5 Pro and surpassing all other open-source
models. This significant improvement on easy tasks indicates that the model accurately captures
key content in audio streams, producing captions that preserve all major information required for
downstream understanding and reasoning.
MMAR (Ma et al., 2025) benchmark measures complex, multi-step audio reasoning, including sce-
narios mixing sound, music, and speech in various combinations. From Table 8, Audio-Captioner
attains the best open-source performance with an average of 59.8%, and even surpasses the pro-
prietary Gemini 2.5 Flash model. Notably, the performance gains of Audio-Captioner are even
more pronounced in mixed-modality scenarios: in the challenging mixed Speech–Sound–Music sce-
nario, Audio-Captioner achieves 66.67%, outperforming the next-best open-source model of Qwen-
2.5-Omni by +37.5 absolute points. This underscores its robustness in fine-grained comprehension,
especially in acoustically cluttered and compositionally complex environments.
C.2.2
AUDIO–VISUAL QA BENCHMARKS.
Video-MME (Fu et al., 2025) evaluates comprehension of videos spanning short (<2min), medium
(4–15min), and long (30–60min) durations. As shown in Table 9, Omni-Captioner achieves an
average of 67.1% without subtitles, ranking first among open-source models and closely trailing
Gemini 2.5 Flash. It delivers prominent short-video performance of 77.2%, but lags on long videos
of 58.0%, suggesting a potential avenue for future improvement.
Video-Holmes (Cheng et al., 2025) measures higher-order video reasoning across seven sub-tasks
requiring multi-detail grounding (e.g., Social Reasoning, Temporal Causal Inference). From Ta-
ble 10, Omni-Captioner achieves an average score of 48.8%, outperforming the next-best open-
source model, video-SALMONN 2 by +5.9 absolute points, with consistent gains across nearly all
sub-task categories.
Daily-Omni (Zhou et al., 2025) benchmark evaluates temporally-aligned multimodal reasoning over
diverse scenarios. As shown in Table 11, Omni-Captioner reaches the highest open-source score of
67.9%, and notably surpasses Gemini 2.5 Flash. It particularly excels in the AV Event Alignment
task, where its score of 61.3% surpasses the next-best open-source model by +11.3, which highlights
Omni-Captioner’s strong capability to produce captions that reflect the temporal alignment of audio
and visual details.
WorldSense (Hong et al., 2025) benchmark tests recognition, understanding, and reasoning in au-
dio–visual perception in Table 12. Omni-Captioner achieves 48.2%, leading all open-source com-
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
petitors and closing much of the gap to proprietary Gemini 2.5 Pro, with balanced gains across all
three skill dimensions.
C.3
RESULTS WITH OMNI-CLOZE
Tables 13 and 14 report the Accuracy (Acc), Not-Given rate (NG), and Hallucination rate (Hall) for
models with strong captioning ability on the Omni-Cloze benchmark, split into audio-only and au-
dio–visual settings. Across both audio-only and audio–visual evaluations, our captioner models con-
sistently produce lower Not-Given rates and higher accuracies than all open-source baselines, and
often outperform strong proprietary systems. The increase in hallucination is a natural consequence
of reduced abstention and richer detail coverage, also shown in Figure 2. This trade-off, given the
magnitude of the accuracy gains, is favorable for fine-grained multimodal perception tasks. These
trends confirm that the high-quality, modality-rich captions produced by Audio-/Omni-Captioner ef-
fectively support stable, detail-oriented cloze-style evaluation while revealing each model’s strengths
and weaknesses in coverage versus correctness.
Table 7: MMAU results with a cascade of audio captions and LLM. Results of three domains: Sound
(So), Music (Mu), and Speech (Sp), and three difficulty levels Easy, Medium, and Hard are listed.
Methods
Across Modality (%)
Across Difficulty (%)
Avg (%)
So
Mu
Sp
Easy
Medium
Hard
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o Audio
60.96
58.08
68.17
53.12
68.52
57.20
62.40
Gemini 2.0 Flash
60.66
57.49
57.66
45.98
65.19
55.51
58.60
Gemini 2.5 Flash
65.47
59.58
71.77
57.59
68.70
66.10
65.60
Gemini 2.5 Pro
68.47
65.87
75.68
66.07
73.70
65.25
70.00
Open-Source Models
SALMONN-13B
67.57
60.36
47.15
49.11
64.38
53.39
58.36
Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct
71.47
58.98
47.75
46.43
65.37
58.05
59.40
MiDashengLM-7B
71.47
62.28
56.16
57.14
68.10
58.05
63.30
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
69.67
64.67
61.26
58.48
69.07
62.71
65.20
Audio-Captioner-7B
67.87
66.17
75.98
70.09
71.85
65.68
70.00
Table 8: MMAR results with a cascade of audio captions and LLM. Results on single-modality:
(So, Mu, Sp), and mixed-modality conditions: (So-Mu, So-Sp, Mu-Sp, So-Mu-Sp) are listed.
Model
Single Modality (%)
Mixed Modalities (%)
Avg (%)
So
Mu
Sp
So-Mu
So-Sp
Mu-SP
So-Mu-Sp
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o Audio
41.21
41.75
69.05
36.36
73.39
69.51
62.50
59.30
Gemini 2.0 Flash
40.00
47.09
57.14
27.27
57.34
48.78
29.17
50.60
Gemini 2.5 Flash
42.42
44.17
68.03
63.64
67.43
64.63
58.33
58.20
Gemini 2.5 Pro
52.12
47.57
74.15
63.64
74.31
68.29
58.33
64.10
Open-Source Models
SALMONN-13B
50.91
35.92
43.20
9.09
46.79
37.80
25.00
42.50
Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct
46.06
40.29
60.88
27.27
53.67
46.34
45.83
50.70
MiDashengLM-7B
47.88
43.20
42.86
63.64
45.87
45.12
16.67
44.20
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
43.64
43.69
64.29
27.27
51.83
53.66
29.17
51.80
Audio-Captioner-7B
55.15
46.12
68.37
63.64
61.01
67.07
66.67
59.80
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 9: Video-MME results with a cascade of audio-visual captions and LLM. Results on Short,
Medium, and Long durations are listed. *Results of Qwen2.5-Omni-7B and video-SALMONN
2-7B are from the cascade evaluation in the video-SALMONN 2 original paper.
Model
Duration(%)
Avg(%)
Short
Medium
Long
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
71.2
64.1
57.9
64.4
Gemini 2.5 Flash
76.2
70.2
60.8
69.1
Gemini 2.5 Pro
80.8
77.1
67.1
75.0
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
42.8
39.4
43.1
41.8
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
43.7
44.9
44.7
44.4
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B*
-
-
-
52.7
video-SALMONN 2-7B*
-
-
-
65.9
Omni-Captioner-7B
77.2
66.1
58.0
67.1
Table 10: Video-Holmes results with a cascade of audio-visual captions and LLM. The benchmark
covers seven sub-tasks: Social Reasoning (SR), Physical Anomaly Reasoning (PAR), Multimodal
Hint Reasoning (MHR), Intention & Motive Chaining (IMC), Timeline Analysis (TA), Temporal
Causal Inference (TCI), and Core Theme Inference (CTI).
Model
Task(%)
Avg(%)
SR
IMC
CTI
TCI
TA
MHR
PAR
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o
50.0
43.5
39.6
39.6
35.5
45.8
41.2
42.7
Gemini 2.0 Flash
61.3
60.9
49.2
42.9
41.5
51.2
50.0
51.6
Gemini 2.5 Flash
59.9
59.0
46.7
46.5
43.5
54.8
56.7
52.8
Gemini 2.5 Pro
68.8
65.9
51.8
58.2
49.0
63.6
56.2
59.9
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
35.6
35.9
23.3
26.0
36.5
28.6
36.6
31.4
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
35.3
38.8
27.0
27.8
34.0
34.9
37.1
33.5
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
37.3
38.0
30.0
30.0
38.0
38.3
39.2
35.7
video-SALMONN 2-7B
53.1
42.8
40.0
39.2
37.0
41.0
46.4
42.9
Omni-Captioner-7B
57.2
55.8
40.4
45.8
40.5
48.5
51.5
48.8
Table 11: Daily-Omni results with a cascade of audio-visual captions and LLM. Daily-Omni spans
diverse daily life scenarios.
Model
Context
Understanding
Reaso-
-ning
Infer-
-ence
Compa-
-rative
Event
Sequence
AV Event
Alignment
Avg
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
51.3
74.3
76.0
69.5
54.9
50.4
60.6
Gemini 2.5 Flash
50.8
71.4
77.9
60.3
55.2
50.8
59.5
Gemini 2.5 Pro
66.3
87.4
83.8
80.9
65.7
68.9
73.6
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
37.3
58.9
56.5
51.9
39.9
36.6
45.0
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
31.6
49.7
51.9
48.1
37.3
30.7
39.9
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
36.8
68.6
60.4
54.2
40.2
39.9
47.9
video-SALMONN 2-7B
51.3
74.9
74.7
65.6
53.9
50.0
59.7
Omni-Captioner-7B
61.7
80.0
83.1
69.5
61.8
61.3
67.9
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 12: Worldsense results with a cascade of audio-visual captions and LLM. The benchmark tests
Recognition, Understanding, and Reasoning covering broad scenarios.
Model
Task Domain(%)
Avg(%)
Recognition
Understanding
Reasoning
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
38.0
45.8
49.2
43.1
Gemini 2.5 Flash
39.6
47.4
50.4
44.6
Gemini 2.5 Pro
48.8
57.3
57.9
53.6
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
24.0
27.3
31.1
26.8
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
24.0
28.0
29.8
26.7
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
27.2
34.1
32.7
30.6
video-SALMONN 2-7B
40.2
45.4
49.3
44.1
Omni-Captioner-7B
43.4
50.0
54.6
48.2
Table 13: Results for audio models with strong captioning ability on Omni-Cloze (Audio Part).
Model
NG(↓)
Hall(↓)
Acc(↑)
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o Audio
60.27
3.96
35.77
Gemini 2.0 Flash
77.14
2.91
19.95
Gemini 2.5 Flash
51.22
6.19
42.59
Gemini 2.5 Pro
47.30
4.74
47.96
Open-Source Models
SALMONN-13B
87.36
2.09
10.55
MiDashengLM-7B
77.50
3.00
19.50
Qwen2-Audio-7B
74.87
2.98
22.15
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
71.41
2.78
25.80
Audio-Captioner-7B
40.99
5.81
53.19
Table 14: Results for audio-visual models with strong captioning ability on Omni-Cloze.
Model
Visual Part%
Acc(↑)
Audio Part%
Acc(↑)
AV Part%
Acc(↑)
Total%
Acc(↑)
NG(↓)
Hall(↓)
NG(↓)
Hall(↓)
NG(↓)
Hall(↓)
NG(↓)
Hall(↓)
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.0 Flash
62.3
5.4
32.3
65.4
3.0
31.7
54.4
5.5
40.1
62.2
4.6
33.2
Gemini 2.5 Flash
72.8
2.8
24.4
57.8
6.0
36.2
52.7
5.8
41.4
62.1
4.9
33.0
Gemini 2.5 Pro
53.3
5.9
40.8
52.2
3.7
44.1
40.7
6.5
52.8
51.1
5.2
43.6
Open-Source Models
video-SALMONN-13B
95.0
1.5
3.5
97.0
0.7
2.3
93.7
1.7
4.6
95.5
1.3
3.3
VideoLLaMA 2-7B
90.8
1.7
7.6
94.9
0.8
4.3
89.8
1.6
8.7
92.0
1.4
6.6
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B
80.0
1.8
18.3
83.2
2.7
14.1
74.9
3.1
21.9
80.9
2.5
16.6
video-SALMONN 2-7B
55.5
6.9
37.5
55.6
4.2
40.3
48.1
6.9
45.0
54.5
6.0
39.5
Omni-Captioner-7B
33.4
12.0
54.6
35.6
7.4
57.0
26.5
11.5
62.1
33.2
10.4
56.4
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
D
MORE ANALYSIS
D.1
ELO OF OMNI-CLOZE
D.1.1
HYPERPARAMETERS
To examine the correlation between the automatic evaluation results of Omni-Cloze and human
preferences, we conduct a human-judged Elo ranking across a set of audio–video models, including
Gemini 2.0 Flash, Gemini 2.5 Flash, Gemini 2.5 Pro, VideoLLaMA 2, Qwen2.5-Omni-7B, video-
SALMONN 2-7B, and Omni-Captioner-7B. We collect 500 pairs of captions generated by different
models and use these pairwise comparisons as simulated matches in the Elo rating procedure. This
human-based ranking serves as a reference to evaluate how closely Omni-Cloze scores align with
actual human judgments. The hyperparameters applied in the Elo ranking system are summarized
in Table 15.
Table 15: Hyperparameters of the Elo ranking system for arena-style evaluation.
Hyperparameter
Value
Initial Elo Mean
1,000
Base of Logarithm
10
Scaling Factor
400
K-Factor
32
Simulated Matches
500
D.1.2
MODALITY-WISE ANALYSIS
Figure 9 shows the relationship between Elo scores and Omni-Cloze accuracy across visual-only,
(b) audio-only, and audio-visual modalities, which demonstrate strong positive correlations.
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Elo Score
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Cloze Accuracy (%)
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r = 0.89)
(a) Visual modality
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Elo Score
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Cloze Accuracy (%)
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r = 0.92)
(b) Audio modality
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Elo Score
0
20
40
60
80
Cloze Accuracy (%)
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r = 0.88)
(c) Audio-Visual modality
Figure 9: Scatter plots showing the relationship between Elo scores and Omni-Cloze accuracy across
different modalities: (a) visual, (b) audio, and (c) audio-visual.
E
LIMITATIONS
Although this work explicitly explores hallucination issues in detailed captioning, a key limitation
is that our evaluation cannot detect all hallucination types. In open-domain detailed captioning,
we observe two main forms of hallucination: (1) The model correctly identifies the presence of a
detail in the input but supplies incorrect information about it (content-level inaccuracy); (2) The
model outputs content entirely unrelated to the given audio–visual input (irrelevant generation). Our
proposed Omni-Cloze benchmark is able to capture and penalize the first type by adding a Not Given
choice for each blank. However, the second type remains difficult to measure reliably because cases
exist where the model predicts a detail that is in fact present in the audio–visual input but is missing
from the ground truth reference. Developing robust methods to handle this issue is an important
direction for future work in hallucination evaluation for omni detailed perception.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
F
CASE STUDY
Table 16: Comprehensive error analysis for all cloze blanks in the PBA-League passage.
#
Modality
Cue (short description)
Correct answer
Predicted answer
GT
Pred
✓/×
1
Visual
Arena venue
Bayside Bowl
Bayside Bowl
C
C
✓
2
Visual
Team shown on graphic
L.A. X
L.A. X
B
B
✓
3
Visual
Shirt colour (Butturff)
red
red
B
B
✓
4
Visual
Ear with earring
left
left
D
D
✓
5
Visual
Event where he finished
2nd
U.S. OPEN
not given
C
E
×
6
Auditory
First
organised
crowd
chant
Jakob
L.A. X
D
C
×
7
Auditory
Sound effect type
stinger
stinger
C
C
✓
8
Auditory
Secondary effect
whoosh
whoosh
D
D
✓
9
Audio-Visual
Bowler named on overlay
Jakob Butturff
Jakob Butturff
A
A
✓
10
Visual
Series
score
(semifinal
lead)
1–0
not given
B
E
×
11
Visual
Kingpins
score
(mid-
game)
117
117
C
C
✓
12
Visual
Strike-Track ball speed
18.6 MPH
not given
B
E
×
13
Visual
Strike-Track rev-rate
533 RPM
not given
B
E
×
14
Auditory
Ball-rumble stereo posi-
tion (1st shot)
dead centre
dead centre
A
A
✓
15
Auditory
Pinfall result
strike
strike
A
A
✓
16
Auditory
Handedness called
lefty
lefty
D
D
✓
17
Auditory
Player-of-year candidate
named
Jason Belmonte
not given
D
E
×
18
Visual
Fist-pump hand
right
not given
B
E
×
19
Audio-Visual
Celebration gesture
high-fives
high-fives
B
B
✓
20
Visual
Audience accessories
Santa hats
not given
D
E
×
21
Visual
“Coming Up Next” oppo-
nent
Portland
Portland
C
C
✓
22
Audio-Visual
Logo
on
Sherman’s
sleeve
STORM
Turbo
C
B
×
23
Auditory
Crowd-chant word 1
Sherman
Sherman
D
D
✓
24
Auditory
Crowd-chant word 2
Sherman
Sherman
D
D
✓
25
Auditory
Crowd-chant word 3
Sherman
Sherman
D
D
✓
26
Auditory
Stands song
Hey!
Hey-hey!
Goodbye!
Hey!
Hey-hey!
Goodbye!
C
C
✓
27
Audio-Visual
Leg kicked in follow-
through
left leg
right leg
D
B
×
28
Auditory
Ball-rumble channel lo-
cation (2nd shot)
centre
not given
A
E
×
29
Audio-Visual
Remaining pin state
wobbling
wobbling
C
C
✓
30
Auditory
Crowd reaction sound
groan
groan
B
B
✓
31
Auditory
Spare-leave call
ringing ten
not given
C
E
×
32
Audio-Visual
Kingpins total after 8th
frame
146
136
B
C
×
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The segment opens in a packed bowling arena at [
 
 Bayside Bowl] (A: Thunderbowl Lanes | B: South Point Bowling 
Plaza | 
| D: AMF Riviera Lanes | E: not given), a PBA League semifinal between [
 
 L.A. X] (A: 
Portland Lumberjacks | 
 | C: Motown Muscle | D: Dallas Strikers | E: not given) and the Kingpins. The first 
image is a medium close-up of Jakob Butturff in a bright [
 
 red] (A: black | 
 | C: blue | D: green | E: not given) 
polo with a blue X over a bear shield, lips pressed and focused, a small silver earring in his [
 
 left] (A: right | B: both | 
C: none | 
 | E: not given) ear. A blue-and-white lower-third flashes "JAKOB BUTTURFF" with "FINISHED 2ND 
IN 2017 & 2018 [
 
 U.S. OPEN] (A: Masters | B: Tournament of Champions | 
| D: World Championship 
| E: not given)" beneath. A male commentator, in a clear broadcast tone, says: "opposite to 21, Jakob Butturff." From the 
crowd comes an organized chant of "[
 
 L.A. X] (A: Let's go | B: Butturff | C: L.A. X | 
 | E: not given)" that 
swells beneath the call. A sharp electronic [
 
 stinger] (A: jingle | B: siren | 
 | D: drumroll | E: not given) with 
a [
 
 
] (A: horn | B: clang | C: beep | D: whoosh | E: not given) punctuates the build as the camera tracks behind 
the first bowler. The stinger and whoosh signal imminent action just as [
 
 
 Jakob Butturff] (
 | B: 
Norm Duke | C: Jason Belmonte | D: Kyle Sherman | E: not given) begins his approach on screen. The left overlay shows 
"Semifinals - L.A. X Lead [
 
 not given] (A: 0-1 | 
 | C: 1-1 | D: 2-0 | E: not given)" with Kingpins [
 
 117] (A: 
96 | B: 126 | 
 | D: 146 | E: not given) and L.A. X 96, while the Strike Track animates: his first-shot line overlays the 
ideal, showing [
 
 not given] (A: 16.8 MPH | 
 | C: 19.3 MPH | D: 20.1 MPH | E: not given) and [
 
 not 
given] (A: 454 RPM | 
 | C: 380 RPM | D: 600 RPM | E: not given). The ball's low rumble grows [
 
 dead 
center] (
 | B: hard left | C: offstage | D: far right | E: not given) and then detonates into a clean, explosive 
[
 
 strike] (
 | B: spare | C: split | D: gutter | E: not given), sending all ten pins down and unleashing a roar from 
the crowd. Announcer 2 exclaims, "Ooh, what an angle that was to the pocket for the [
 
 lefty] (A: rookie | B: righty | 
C: veteran | 
 | E: not given)," then adds, "By the way, we've talked about [
 
 not given] (A: Pete Weber | B: Kyle 
Troup | C: Norm Duke | 
 | E: not given) as player of the year candidate." Butturff pivots left, slams a 
downward [
 
 not given] (A: left | 
 | C: both | D: no | E: not given)-handed fist pump, then strides to the rail for a 
gauntlet of [
 
 
 high-fives] (A: chest bumps | 
 | C: handshakes | D: hugs | E: not given) as red-tinted 
audience lighting flashes over [
 
 not given] (A: beanies | B: cowboy hats | C: foam fingers | 
 | E: not 
given) and other holiday outfits. A "Coming Up Next: DALLAS vs [
 
 PORTLAND] (A: DALLAS | B: SEATTLE | 
 | D: HOUSTON | E: not given)" graphic with portraits appears. The rhythm resets for the Kingpins. A 
medium shot frames Kyle Sherman in a blue-and-black polo marked with a Turbo logo, [
 
 
 Turbo] (A: Roto Grip | 
B: Turbo | 
 | D: Ebonite | E: not given) on the sleeve, a "500" patch, and a shielded Statue of Liberty. The 
crowd's buzz eases into a pocket of anticipation, and from the right side a chant of "[
 
 Sherman] (A: Belmo | B: Jakob | 
C: Portland | D: Sherman | E: not given), [
 
 Sherman] (A: Belmo | B: Jakob | C: Portland | 
 | E: not given), 
[
 
 Sherman] (A: Belmo | B: Jakob | C: Portland | 
 | E: not given)" rises. As he starts his approach, some in 
the stands sing "[
 
 not given] (A: We will rock you! | B: Defense! | 
 | D: Let's go! | E: not 
given)." The Strike Track updates: 19.3 MPH, 454 RPM, position at arrows 12.0, breakpoint board 4.2, while Sherman's 
[
 
 
 right] (A: rear | B: right | C: front | 
 | E: not given) leg kicks high in the follow-through. The ball's rumble 
builds in the [
 
 not given] (
 | B: rear | C: left channel | D: right channel | E: not given) and then cracks 
sharply; chaos scatters nine pins and leaves the back-right pin [
 
 
 wobbling] (A: sliding | B: falling | 
 | 
D: spinning | E: not given) but upright. A collective "Oh!" and then a [
 
 groan] (A: hiss | 
 | C: laugh | D: 
whistle | E: not given) rolls through the venue. Commentator 2 reacts, "Wow, a violent [
 
 not given] (A: pocket seven | 
B: stone eight | 
 | D: solid nine | E: not given) against Kyle Sherman." The scoreboard updates the eighth 
frame with a 9 and a Kingpins total of [
 
 
 136] (A: 156 | 
 | C: 136 | D: 126 | E: not given) while L.A. X 
remains at 96. Sherman turns away, expression tight, disengaging without celebration, and the pinsetter machinery thrums 
as it resets the deck. Around the set, banners read PBA LEAGUE, BAYSIDE BOWL, and GO BOWLING, with sidebars 
looping CLARK logos, as the broadcast settles back into steady analysis and crowd murmur.
C: Bayside Bowl 
B: L.A. X
B: red
D: left
C: U.S. OPEN 
D: Jakob
C: stinger
whoosh
A: Jakob Butturff
B: 1-0
C: 117
B: 18.6 MPH
B: 533 RPM
A: dead center
A: strike
D: lefty
D: Jason Belmonte
B: right
B: high-fives
D: Santa hats
C: 
PORTLAND
C: STORM
D: Sherman
D: Sherman
C: Hey! Hey-hey! Goodbye!
D: left
A: center
C: wobbling
B: groan
C: ringing ten
B: 146
Omni-Captioner
 Visual
 Auditory
 
 Audio-Visual
Twelve frames uniformly sampled from the video, arranged in row-major order (left-to-right, top-to-bottom).
Figure 10: Visualization for all cloze blanks in the PBA-League passage.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
The video opens on a crisp static shot of a cookbook titled [
 
 STREET VEGAN] (
 | B: GREEN 
KITCHEN | C: VEGAN STREET FOOD | D: PLANT POWER | E: not given), credited to [
 
 not given] (A: Chloe 
Coscarelli | B: Isa Chandra Moskowitz | 
| D: Bryant Terry | E: not given), beside a blocky white sign 
handwritten in [
 
 not given] (
 | B: green | C: red | D: blue | E: not given) ink that whimsically mentions "Soft 
Space-age [
 
 not given] (A: Robot-chefs | 
 | C: Cat-people | D: Space Bears | E: not given)." Under this, a 
relaxed [
 
 jazz/lounge] (A: classical | B: rock | C: hip-hop | 
 | E: not given) music track plays as low 
ambient walla suggests a busy [
 
 not given] (A: library | B: office | C: gym | 
 | E: not given) or cafe, with 
occasional [
 
 not given] (A: whistles | B: applause | C: footsteps | 
 | E: not given) of glasses. A warm, close-
miked male voice in a [
 
 not given] (
 | B: falsetto | C: monotone | D: soprano | E: not given) range 
begins, saying veganism can be "extra [
 
 delicious] (A: affordable | B: healthy | C: ethical | 
 | E: not given) 
and innovative," and the filler word "[
 
 not given] (A: you know | 
 | C: um | D: uh | E: not given)" pops up 
twice; a brief high‑pitched [
 
 not given] (A: male | 
 | C: robotic | D: child | E: not given) laugh flares in the 
background. The scene cuts to a close-up of fair-skinned hands in a [
 
 not given] (A: blue | 
 | C: gray | D: 
black | E: not given) long-sleeved garment working a braided dough that oozes a dark [
 
 brown] (A: yellow | B: brown 
| 
 | D: red | E: not given) chunky filling, and torn pieces are placed onto a [
 
 not given] (A: ceramic | B: solid |
 
 | D: wooden | E: not given) baking tray. A display counter appears with placards: one reads "SPINACH PIE 
WITH ROASTED [
 
 not given] (
 | B: MUSHROOMS | C: PEPPERS | D: ONION | E: not given) AND 
CAPERS," while another labels a round pastry "CURRIED [
 
 not given] (A: POTATO | 
 | C: CHICKPEA | 
D: TOFU | E: not given) PUFF." As he lists peanut components, the visuals cut to a vibrant salad served in a brown [
 
 take-out] (A: glass | B: ceramic | C: metal | 
 | E: not given) box while he says the peanuts are tossed with 
smoked chilies, a little dash of [
 
 agave nectar] (
 | B: brown sugar | C: maple syrup | D: molasses | E: 
not given), and [
 
 tamari] (A: soy sauce | B: miso | C: mirin | 
 | E: not given). He rejects blandness with, "I'm 
not gonna use just basic, plain‑ass [
 
 peanuts] (A: cashews | B: walnuts | 
 | D: almonds | E: not given) that 
don't have any pizzazz; I wanna [
 
 season] (A: dress | 
 | C: season | D: plate | E: not given) it up with pizzazz." 
The climactic build shows the proclamation "This is the Beast Mode Burger Deluxe" aligning with the burger being 
assembled on a [
 
 not given] (A: steel | B: black | 
 | D: wooden | E: not given) cutting board: a bun bottom 
spread with glossy orange-tinted sauce, fresh [
 
 arugula] (
 | B: lettuce | C: spinach | D: kale | E: not given) 
layered on, then a thick, crisp brown patty, after which, immediately following the naming, a generous helping of a [
 
 not given] (A: green | B: yellow | C: white | 
 | E: not given)-colored sauce is added. Sliced, [
 
 translucent] 
(A: opaque | B: minced | 
 | D: charred | E: not given) pickled onions glisten as they are placed with tongs, and 
a scoop of creamy, pale [
 
 not given] (A: potato salad | 
 | C: coleslaw | D: risotto | E: not given) 
with flecks of herbs crowns the stack. A [
 
 tattooed] (A: sleeved | 
 | C: braceleted | D: bandaged | E: not 
given) forearm enters to sprinkle something crispy and dark over the top. As he says, "And it gets finished with some of 
this smoked chili coconut bacon," a gentle [
 
 
 sprinkling] (
 | B: sizzling | C: chopping | D: whirring | E: 
not given) sound rises while the crispy dark topping falls onto the mac and cheese. The clip cuts off abruptly mid-word 
during "[
 
 not given] (A: burger | 
 | C: beast | D: deluxe | E: not given)," with no fade. At the very start, while 
the cookbook and quirky sign hold the frame, the narration frames vegan food as "extra delicious and [
 
 
innovative] 
(A: traditional | 
 | C: simple | D: spicy | E: not given)."
A: STREET VEGAN
C: Adam Sobel 
A: black
B: Dog-men
D: jazz/lounge
D: restaurant
D: clinks
A: tenor-to-baritone
D: delicious
B: like
B: female
B: white
C: purple
C: mesh
A: GARLIC
B: LENTIL
D: take-out
A: agave nectar
D: tamari
C: peanuts
B: hook
C: white
A: arugula
D: red
C: translucent
B: macaroni and cheese
B: tattooed
A: sprinkling
B: bacon
B: innovative
Omni-Captioner
 Visual
 Auditory
 
 Audio-Visual
Twelve frames uniformly sampled from the video, arranged in row-major order (left-to-right, top-to-bottom).
Figure 11: Visualization for all cloze blanks in the “Street Vegan” passage.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 17: Comprehensive error analysis for all cloze blanks in the “Street Vegan” passage.
#
Modality
Cue (short description)
Correct answer
Predicted answer
GT
Pred
✓/×
1
Visual
Cookbook title
STREET
VE-
GAN
STREET
VE-
GAN
A
A
✓
2
Visual
Author credited
Adam Sobel
not given
C
E
×
3
Visual
Ink colour on sign
black
not given
A
E
×
4
Visual
“Soft
Space-age
.. . ”
creature
Dog-men
not given
B
E
×
5
Auditory
Background music style
jazz/lounge
jazz/lounge
D
D
✓
6
Auditory
Ambient location sound
restaurant
not given
D
E
×
7
Auditory
Occasional
background
sound
clinks
not given
D
E
×
8
Auditory
Narrator voice range
tenor-to-baritone
not given
A
E
×
9
Auditory
Adjective
used
(“extra
. ..”)
delicious
delicious
D
D
✓
10
Auditory
Repeated filler word
like
not given
B
E
×
11
Auditory
High-pitched
laugh
–
voice type
female
not given
B
E
×
12
Visual
Colour of long-sleeved
garment
white
not given
B
E
×
13
Visual
Colour of dark chunky
filling
purple
brown
C
B
×
14
Visual
Type of baking tray
mesh
not given
C
E
×
15
Visual
Roasted
ingredient
on
placard
GARLIC
not given
A
E
×
16
Visual
Curried
ingredient
on
placard
LENTIL
not given
B
E
×
17
Audio-Visual
Salad served in .. . box
take-out
take-out
D
D
✓
18
Auditory
Sweetener named
agave nectar
agave nectar
A
A
✓
19
Auditory
Savoury
seasoning
named
tamari
tamari
D
D
✓
20
Auditory
Nut type criticised
peanuts
peanuts
C
C
✓
21
Auditory
Verb
actually
spoken
(“... it up”)
hook
season
B
C
×
22
Audio-Visual
Cutting-board colour/ma-
terial
white
not given
C
E
×
23
Visual
Leafy green placed on
burger
arugula
arugula
A
A
✓
24
Audio-Visual
Colour of sauce added af-
ter naming
red
not given
D
E
×
25
Visual
Appearance
of
pickled
onions
translucent
translucent
C
C
✓
26
Visual
Creamy topping item
macaroni
and
cheese
not given
B
E
×
27
Visual
Forearm characteristic
tattooed
tattooed
B
B
✓
28
Audio-Visual
Sound during topping
sprinkling
sprinkling
A
A
✓
29
Auditory
Word cut off at the end
bacon
not given
B
E
×
30
Audio-Visual
Descriptor
paired
with
“extra delicious”
innovative
innovative
B
B
✓
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A vertical smartphone video tours a restaurant entirely themed around [
 
 Dragon Ball Z] (A: One Piece | B: Naruto | 
 | D: Pokémon | E: not given), while an energetic electronic soundtrack pulses beneath. The music opens 
with a classic [
 
 four-on-the-floor] (A: swing | B: waltz | 
 | D: half-time | E: not given) kick pattern 
and bright synth [
 
 not given] (A: glissandos | 
 | C: tremolos | D: strums | E: not given) driving a 
glossy melody. As the camera glides past a stainless prep area to a granite-patterned counter, two employees in black T-
shirts and caps work methodically—one cap worn forward, the other [
 
 backward] (A: forward | B: inside out | 
 | D: sideways | E: not given)—with a [
 
 not given] (
 | B: red | C: blue | D: green | E: not given) spray 
bottle nearby, sneeze guards separating stations, and cloud decor hanging from a [
 
 not given] (A: red | B: white | C: 
blue | 
 | E: not given) ceiling in front of a large monochrome [
 
 not given] (A: Piccolo | B: Vegeta | C: Frieza |
 
 | E: not given) face mural. A hard cut reveals tall glass cases by a window looking out to a parking lot, and later a 
whip-pan catches a male customer turning away; he says [
 
 
 not given] (A: “hey” | 
 | C: a quiet laugh | D: 
“excuse me” | E: not given) as he leaves the frame. The display sweep shows collectible figures and boxes, including a 
figurine of [
 
 not given] (A: Gohan | 
 | C: Krillin | D: Cell | E: not given) with crossed arms and boxed [
 
 
not given] (A: Hot Wheels | B: Figma | C: Nendoroid | 
 | E: not given) figures below, plus a game box that 
reads [
 
 CLUE] (A: MONOPOLY | B: LIFE | C: RISK | 
 | E: not given) in bold white at the top and a replica 
[
 
 not given] (
 | B: Seven | C: Five | D: Three | E: not given)-Star Dragon Ball. A pan lands on a life-sized Ultra 
Instinct statue with [
 
 not given] (A: black | B: gold | C: blue | 
 | E: not given) hair beside two sleek kiosks 
topped with [
 
 not given] (
 | B: red | C: green | D: purple | E: not given) indicator lights. As the soundtrack 
builds, a rising whoosh [
 
 riser] (A: gong hit | B: stinger | 
 | D: vinyl scratch | E: not given) swells, and the 
compression creates a rhythmic [
 
 pumping] (
 | B: crackling | C: fluttering | D: ringing | E: not given) 
against the beat. A hard cut drops the viewer into a vivid restroom with magenta-on-black walls and an LED mirror; the 
person filming appears via her reflection. She speaks while visible in the [
 
 
 mirror] (
 | B: doorway | C: 
poster | D: window | E: not given), her General [
 
 not given] (A: Australian | B: British RP | 
 | D: Southern 
drawl | E: not given) accent clear as she says, "Alright, so I'm in the bathroom. Pretty [
 
 cool] (
 | B: strange | C: 
funny | D: cool | E: not given)." There is a brief [
 
 pause] (A: sigh | B: laughter | C: cough | 
 | E: not given) 
between “bathroom” and “pretty wild,” and a faint [
 
 not given] (A: ringtone | B: clapping | C: footsteps | 
 | 
E: not given) at the start of her speech. No [
 
 not given] (A: faucet drip | B: hand dryer | C: sink | 
 | E: not 
given) sounds are heard. During this mirror shot, the music’s studio sheen dips and sounds distant and reverberant, 
matching the small hard-surfaced room. Right after she finishes, the pristine track slams back in via a precise [
 
 hard 
edit] (A: gradual fade-in | 
 | C: slow crossfade | D: long echo | E: not given), launching a build that leads to the 
drop with a powerful bassline and a classic [
 
 supersaw] (A: Rhodes | B: electric guitar | 
 | D: acoustic 
piano | E: not given) lead timbre. Short, high-pitched processed accents—“[
 
 not given] (A: Yo! | B: Heya! | C: Go! |
 
 | E: not given)!”—cut through the mix, and they occur while the camera remains in the [
 
 
 bathroom] (
 | B: kitchen | C: storage room | D: dining area | E: not given). Near the end of the bathroom segment, she [
 
 
 adjusts her hair] (A: sets the phone down | B: opens the faucet | 
 | D: claps her hands | E: not 
given), and a brief fabric sound coincides with the motion. Throughout, the track drives in [
 
 4/4] (A: 3/4 | B: 7/8 | 
| D: 5/4 | E: not given) time and finally ends with an [
 
 abrupt stop] (A: gradual fade-out | B: tape slowdown | 
 | D: extended reverb tail | E: not given), not a fade. Meanwhile, the woman’s look in the mirror includes 
glasses, visible tattoos, a silver cross necklace, and an anime T-shirt, and while delivering the line she holds her 
smartphone [
 
 
 not given] (A: diagonally | B: upside down | 
 | D: vertically | E: not given).
C: 
Dragon Ball Z
C: four-on-the-floor
B: arpeggiations
C: 
backward
A: white
D: black
D: Goku
B: nothing
B: Vegeta
D: Funko Pop
D: CLUE
A: Four
D: silver
A: blue
C: riser
A: pumping
A: mirror
C: American
A: wild
D: pause
D: rustling
D: toilet
B: hard edit
C: supersaw
D: Hey!
A: 
bathroom
C: adjusts her hair
C: 
4/4 
C: 
abrupt stop
C: horizontally
Omni-Captioner
 Visual
 Auditory
 
 Audio-Visual
Twelve frames uniformly sampled from the video, arranged in row-major order (left-to-right, top-to-bottom).
Figure 12: Visualization for all cloze blanks in the Dragon-Ball-Z-themed-restaurant passage.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 18: Comprehensive error analysis for all cloze blanks in the Dragon-Ball-Z-themed-restaurant
passage.
#
Modality
Cue (short description)
Correct answer
Predicted answer
GT
Pred
✓/×
1
Visual
Restaurant theme
Dragon Ball Z
Dragon Ball Z
C
C
✓
2
Auditory
Kick-drum pattern
four-on-the-floor
four-on-the-floor
C
C
✓
3
Auditory
Synth ornament
arpeggiations
not given
B
E
×
4
Visual
Second employee’s cap
orientation
backward
backward
C
C
✓
5
Visual
Colour of spray bottle
white
not given
A
E
×
6
Visual
Ceiling colour with cloud
d´ecor
black
not given
D
E
×
7
Visual
Character
on
monochrome face mural
Goku
not given
D
E
×
8
Audio-Visual
Customer utterance while
exiting
(nothing)
not given
B
E
×
9
Visual
Arms-crossed figurine
Vegeta
not given
B
E
×
10
Visual
Type of boxed figures
Funko Pop
not given
D
E
×
11
Visual
Board-game box shown
CLUE
CLUE
D
D
✓
12
Visual
Replica
Dragon
Ball
(number of stars)
Four-Star
not given
A
E
×
13
Visual
Ultra-Instinct statue hair
colour
silver
not given
D
E
×
14
Visual
Kiosk
indicator-light
colour
blue
not given
A
E
×
15
Auditory
Transition SFX type
riser
riser
C
C
✓
16
Auditory
Side-chain / level effect
pumping
pumping
A
A
✓
17
Audio-Visual
Surface that shows filmer
(bathroom)
mirror
mirror
A
A
✓
18
Auditory
Speaker’s accent
American
not given
C
E
×
19
Auditory
Adjective in “Pretty . .. ”
wild
not given
A
E
×
20
Auditory
Intentional
pause
after
“bathroom”
pause
pause
D
D
✓
21
Auditory
Faint sound at speech
start
rustling
not given
D
E
×
22
Auditory
Sound explicitly absent
(“No . .. heard”)
toilet
not given
D
E
×
23
Auditory
Music returns via
hard edit
hard edit
B
B
✓
24
Auditory
Lead-synth timbre
supersaw
supersaw
C
C
✓
25
Auditory
Short processed vocal ac-
cent
“Hey!”
not given
D
E
×
26
Audio-Visual
Room shown during vo-
cal accents
bathroom
bathroom
A
A
✓
27
Audio-Visual
Action: filmer adjusts . . .
her hair
her hair
C
C
✓
28
Auditory
Time signature of track
4/4
4/4
C
C
✓
29
Auditory
Track ending style
abrupt stop
abrupt stop
C
C
✓
30
Audio-Visual
Orientation of phone in
her hand
horizontally
not given
C
E
×
28