--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
CAPTAIN CINEMA:
TOWARDS SHORT MOVIE GENERATION
Junfei Xiao1,2
Ceyuan Yang2∗Lvmin Zhang3
Shengqu Cai2,3
Yang Zhao2
Yuwei Guo2,4
Gordon Wetzstein3
Maneesh Agrawala3
Alan Yuille1
Lu Jiang2
1Johns Hopkins University
2ByteDance Seed
3Stanford University
4CUHK
ABSTRACT
We present Captain Cinema, a generation framework for short movie genera-
tion. Given a detailed textual description of a movie storyline, our approach firstly
generates a sequence of keyframes that outline the entire narrative, which ensures
long-range coherence in both the storyline and visual appearance (e.g., scenes
and characters). We refer to this step as top-down keyframe planning. These
keyframes then serve as conditioning signals for a video synthesis model, which
supports long context learning, to produce the spatio-temporal dynamics between
them. This step is referred to as bottom-up video synthesis. To support stable
and efficient generation of multi-scene long narrative cinematic works, we in-
troduce an interleaved training strategy for Multimodal Diffusion Transformers
(MM-DiT), specifically adapted for long-context video data. Our model is trained
on a curated cinematic dataset consisting of interleaved samples for video genera-
tion. Our experiments demonstrate that Captain Cinema performs favorably in the
automated creation of visually coherent and narratively consistent short films.
1
INTRODUCTION
Narrative is central to how humans communicate, remember, and perceive the world. As Bruner has
argued (Bruner, 1991), narrative structures are fundamental to organizing human experience, while
Harari (Harari, 2014) emphasizes that shared stories underpin the development of societies. In the
field of video generation (Ho et al., 2022b; Singer et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; 2024b; Ho et al.,
2022a; Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022), recent advances, especially in diffusion-based (Peebles
& Xie, 2023; Brooks et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024c) and auto-regressive mod-
els (Kondratyuk et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023b; 2024; Wang et al., 2024b) have enabled impressive
progress in synthesizing short video clips for tasks such as image animation (Chen et al., 2025; Xu
et al., 2024), video editing (Feng et al., 2024; Ceylan et al., 2023), and stylization (Huang et al.,
2024b). However, these accomplishments predominantly address visual fidelity and local temporal
coherence, leaving the deeper challenge of producing videos that convey coherent, engaging nar-
ratives over extended durations. Bridging this gap—from visually plausible snippets to full-length,
story-driven videos—constitutes a pivotal frontier for research and practice.
Automating the generation of feature-length cinematic narratives remains underexplored. Achieving
narrative coherence and visual consistency over extended durations demands models that capture
long-range dependencies while retaining fine-grained detail. Existing approaches frequently en-
counter exploding context lengths, and visual drift when scaled to longer videos. To overcome these
challenges, we propose Captain Cinema, a framework tailored for story-driven movie synthesis.
Captain Cinema balances global plot structure with local visual fidelity through two comple-
mentary modules. A top-down planner first produces a sequence of key narrative frames that outline
the storyboard, ensuring coherent high-level guidance. A bottom-up video synthesizer then interpo-
lates full motion conditioned on these keyframes, maintaining both narrative flow and visual detail.
Central to this design is GoldenMem, a memory mechanism that selectively retains and compresses
contextual information from past keyframes. By summarizing long histories without exceeding
memory budgets, GoldenMem preserves character and scene consistency across multiple scenes
with super-long context, enabling scalable generation of multi-scene videos.
∗Corresponding author.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Captain 
Cinema
Sora / Kling/ Veo2 …
LCT / 
VideoAuteur … 
Shot-level 
Movie-level 
Scene-level 
Multiple
 shots
Single 
shot
Multiple
 scenes
~8s
~60s
>1,000 s
Figure 1: Captain Cinema: “I can film this all day!” Captain Cinema bridges top-down in-
terleaved keyframe planning with bottom-up interleaved-conditioning video generation, taking a
step toward the first multi-scene, whole-movie generation, preserving superior visual consistency in
scenes and identities across the long video. All the movie frames are generated.
Additionally, we build a specialized data processing pipeline for processing long video data for
movie generation and introduce progressive long-context tuning strategies tailored for Multimodal
Diffusion Transformers (MM-DiT). These techniques enable stable and efficient fine-tuning on
large-scale, long-form cinematic datasets, addressing the challenges of multi-scene video genera-
tion. Extensive experiments and ablation studies demonstrate that Captain Cinema not only
achieves strong performance in long-form narrative video synthesis but also enables the automated
creation of visually consistent short films that significantly exceed the duration of existing works,
setting a new milestone in multimodal video generation capabilities.
2
RELATED WORKS
Text-to-Video Generation. Text-to-video models (Ho et al., 2022b; Singer et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2023; 2024b; Ho et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022) now generate 5–10 s clips with
high visual fidelity. Most adopt a latent diffusion paradigm (Rombach et al., 2022); diffusion variants
such as DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2023), Sora (Brooks et al., 2024), and CogVideo (Hong et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2024c) extend this design with larger datasets and refined denoisers. Autoregressive
alternatives like VideoPoet (Kondratyuk et al., 2024) and the Emu family (Sun et al., 2023b; 2024;
Wang et al., 2024b) instead predict discrete visual tokens sequentially. These approaches remain
clip-centric and lack mechanisms for narrative or visual consistency over longer horizons. We bridge
this gap by introducing explicit consistency regularisation for full-length movie generation.
Interleaved Image–Text Modeling & Conditioning. Interleaved image–text generation (Dong
et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2024a; Ge et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Alayrac et al., 2022) has emerged
as a promising paradigm -for producing richly grounded multimodal content. Early efforts (Radford
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b; Sun et al., 2023a) leveraged large-scale image–text corpora (Gadre
et al., 2024; Schuhmann et al., 2022) but were largely restricted to single-turn tasks such as cap-
tioning or text-to-image synthesis. The advent of large language models (Touvron et al., 2023) and
unified vision–language architectures (Li et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a) has
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
enabled more sophisticated interleaved reasoning, yet most existing systems generate content only
once and overlook coherence across multiple shots. VideoAuteur (Xiao et al., 2024) addresses this
problem through an interleaved VLM director and LCT (Guo et al., 2025) directly finetunes MM-
DiTs to peform long interleaved video generation. Although Diffusion Forcing (Chen et al., 2024a),
LTX-Video (HaCohen et al., 2024a) and Pusa (Liu & Liu, 2025) support multi-keyframe condition-
ing, they remain confined to single-shot scenarios. By contrast, our approach addresses multi-shot
interleaved conditioning, explicitly modeling cross-shot coherence for long-form video generation.
Narrative Visual Generation. Existing research on narrative visual generation primarily focuses
on ensuring semantic alignment and visual consistency. Recent methods—VideoDirectorGPT (Lin
et al., 2024), Vlogger (Zhuang et al., 2024), Animate-a-Story (He et al., 2023), VideoTetris (Tian
et al., 2024b), IC-LoRA (Huang et al., 2024a), and StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024)—pursue
these goals through diverse architectural and training strategies. While most prior work concen-
trates on producing semantically consistent image sets (Huang et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2024b;
Zhou et al., 2024), our objective is to generate fully coherent narrative videos. Although certain
approaches condition synthesis on text (Zhuang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024) or augment prompts
with keyframes (Zhao et al., 2024), our framework explicitly disentangles long-form generation into
(i) interleaved keyframe synthesis and (ii) multi-frame-conditioned video completion. This design
achieves state-of-the-art results in long narrative movie generation, offering superior visual fidelity,
temporal coherence, and robustness to super-long context conditions.
Visual Generation with Token Compression. The computational demands associated with syn-
thesizing high-resolution visual content for video sequences necessitate efficient data representation
strategies. FramePack (Zhang & Agrawala, 2025) employs context packing in video generation to
compress input frames, thereby maintaining a fixed context length for enhanced processing effi-
ciency. MoC (Cai et al., 2026) instead trains a learnable dynamic sparse attention router to select
relevant contexts at the attention level. FlexTok (Bachmann et al., 2025) utilizes an adaptive 1D
tokenizer for images, adjusting token sequence length according to image complexity to achieve se-
mantic compression. LTXVideo (HaCohen et al., 2024b) uses compressed VAEs to improve model
efficiency. PyramidFlow (Jin et al., 2024) performs video diffusion in a pyramid and renoises the
multi-level latents. FAR (Gu et al., 2025) proposes a multi-level causal history structure to establish
long-short-term causal memory and discuss KV cache integrations. HiTVideo (Zhou et al., 2025)
uses hierarchical tokenizers in video generation models and connect to autoregressive language mod-
els. Memory in discrete space like keyframes is less discussed but plays an important role in our
framework to process frame contexts, optimized for synthesizing long-form narrative visuals.
3
METHOD
3.1
LEARNING LONG-RANGE CONTEXT IN MOVIES
Different from (Guo et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2024a) trained on single-scene data, we directly
learn the movie generation task from entire movies. Specifically, our keyframe generation model is
trained on interleaved image-text pairs, while our video generation model learns from interleaved
video-text pairs, significantly enhancing its generalization across scenes and cinematic contexts.
Data. We collect data from public available sources as our experimental dataset, amounting to a
total length of approximately 500 hours. We process whole movies with the following data pipeline
to produce interleaved keyframe-text pairs as well as shot-text pairs. After processing these data,
we obtained roughly 300,000 keyframes and video shots to train our top-down interleaved keyframe
generation model (§3.2) and the bottom-up interleaved conditioned video generation model (§3.3).
Processing & Filtering. We detect scene cuts with PySceneDetect (Breakthrough, 2021) and ex-
tract a mid-clip frame from each resulting segment. After removing black borders, we center-crop to
a 2:1 aspect ratio and resize so the shorter side is 400 pixels. We then run Gemini-2.0 Flash (Gem-
ini Team, 2023) to discard low-quality or uninformative frames and to generate detailed captions
for the remaining keyframes. To annotate characters, we include consistent <character name>
tags to preserve IPs. Section B details the prompt used for keyframe annotation.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
A medium shot captures <Harry Potter> 
levitating a cake over a woman's head, 
hands outstretched in concentration. A 
man in a suit sits to her left, oblivious. 
The setting is a cluttered dining room 
with striped wallpaper and decorative 
lamps. The atmosphere is tense and 
magical, blending the mundane with the 
extraordinary.
The shot, framed by a barred window, 
features three characters. <Ron Weasley> 
is in the front, smiling slightly, while 
another ginger-haired character is slightly 
behind him to the left. Another character's 
face is partially visible behind and to the 
right of Ron. The light is subdued, creating 
a mysterious atmosphere. The setting 
appears to be inside a vehicle.
High-angle shot overlooking the 
<Dursleys>. <Vernon Dursley> frantically 
locks a door with multiple padlocks. 
<Petunia Dursley> is held by <Dudley 
Dursley> in striped pajamas. The setting 
appears to be a cramped hallway in the 
<Dursleys>' house, illuminated with harsh 
lighting. The atmosphere is frantic and 
fearful.
Figure 2: Learn from whole movies. Here is an interleaved data sample processed from full-length
movies. Our data pipeline extract structured narrative and visual information across scenes. Each
frame is annotated with detailed visual description with major <Character Names> of movies.
3.2
TOP-DOWN INTERLEAVED KEYFRAME PLANNING
In this section, we introduce our method to finetune a pretrained Text-to-Image Model (i.e., Flux
1.Dev (Labs, 2024)) for interleaved keyframe generation with stability and efficiency.
Hybrid Attention Masking with MM-DiT. Our design builds on Flux, whose model is split into D
double-stream (image–text) blocks followed by S single-stream blocks. Given P image–text pairs
S = {(xi, yi)}P
i=1, with xi ∈RLI×d and yi ∈RLT ×d, we concatenate the tokens as zi = [xi∥yi].
1. Local (double-stream) blocks. Each of the first D blocks uses a block–diagonal mask Mlocal =
diag(M1, . . . , MP ); such that zi attends only to itself.
2. Global (single-stream) blocks.
Their outputs are concatenated Z = [z1∥. . . ∥zP ] and passed
to the next S blocks. A full mask Mglobal ≡0 enables bi-directional inter-pair attention during
training; swapping it for an upper-triangular mask yields causal, auto-regressive generation.
The two types of masking (cf., Fig. 3b) keeps early computation local and efficient while later blocks
aggregate global context, achieving coherent interleaved key-frame generation.
GoldenMem: Compress Long-Context Visual Memory. As we target movie generation, how
to design a long-context memory bank of generated visual frames is a challenge when the context
growth. Inspired by the golden ratio squares with an upper bound area, we propose GoldenMem
to compress long context visual frames through golden ratio downsamling with semantic-oriented
context selection. To maintain a long visual context without inflating the token budget, we store only
the current frame at full resolution and encode earlier frames at progressively coarser scales. Let the
golden ratio be φ = (1 +
√
5)/2 ≈1.618 and denote the short side of the newest latent by s0 (e.g.,
s0 = 25). We downsample the i-th previous frame by
si =

si−1/φ

,
i = 1, . . . , k,
which yields the inverse-Fibonacci sequence (25, 15, 9, 5, 3) when k = 4. Each si × si latent is
partitioned into non-overlapping p × p patches, contributing ti = (si/p)2 memory tokens. Because
si decays geometrically, the total conditioning cost
T =
k
X
i=0
ti = t0
 1 + φ−2 + φ−4 + . . .

<
φ2
φ2 −1 t0 ≈1.62 t0
remains a constant factor above the single-frame cost t0. Thus GoldenMem preserves a (k+1)-frame
history with a fixed small overhead, as visualized in Figs. 3 and 4.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MM-Diffusion Transformer Blocks 
(Local Attention)
MM-Diffusion Transformer Blocks 
(Global Attention)
(a) Bridging Top-down & Bottom-up Interleaved Generation
Multi-keyframe Conditioned MM-Diffusion Transformer
(Global Attention) 
Less tokens but more memory context 
10
6
4
2
Image-
Text Pair 1 
Image-
Text Pair 2 
Image-
Text Pair 3 
P 1
P2
P3
P 1
P2
P3
P 1
P2
P3
Intra-pair Attention 
(Bi-directional)
Inter-pair Attention
(Bi-directional)
Inter-pair Attention
(Causal)
(b) Hybrid Attention Masking
Inverse Fibonacci 
Downsampling
(c) GoldenMem: Visual Context Compression
…
Figure 3: Method Overview. Captain Cinema bridges top-down and bottom-up interleaved for
one-stage multi-scene movie generation. It introduces a hybrid attention masking strategy with
GoldenMem context compression to learn and generate long movies efficiently and effectively. The
number of GoldenMem tokens (referring to the short side of encoded image latents) is an example
to show the inverse Fibonacci downsampling operation for long context compression.
5512
11024
16536
22048
27560
33072
7824
8984
9696
10280
10824
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
4
8
12
16
20
24
Naïve
GoldenMem
Figure 4: GoldenMem compresses the the context
length. The x-axis shows the number of image-text
pairs, and the y-axis is the total number of tokens. Ini-
tial resolution is 400×800 (H×W).
Figure 5: Semantic-oriented context
retrieval. CLIP text-to-image beats T5
text-to-text for history context retrieval
for in-context storyline video extension.
Semantic-Oriented Context Conditioning Beyond Temporal Distance. Although sequential gen-
eration is intuitive, films frequently employ non-linear devices such as flashbacks, foreshadowing,
and temporal loops. We therefore retrieve context by semantic relevance, conditioning each new
frame on embeddings obtained with CLIP (text–image) and T5 (text–text). This strategy accom-
modates complex narrative structures more effectively than strict temporal conditioning. As shown
in Fig. 5, CLIP Text-to-Image retrieval consistently yields higher coverage than T5-Text-to-Text
retrieval, leading to better memory recall for extracting most relevant history frames.
Progressively Finetuning with Growing Context Length. Directly finetuning on long context in-
terleaved sequences are prone to model collapse and often generate messy backgrounds with broken
semantics (§4.2). To facilitate stable training over interleaved sequences, we use a progressive train-
ing strategy to finetune the model on interleaved data with growing context length. Specifically, we
progressively finetune the model from single-image geneeration to 8, 16, and 32 interleaved pairs.
Dynamic Stride Sampling for Interleaved Sequences. Limited by the data scale, naively sample
consecutive interleaved keyframes can lead models to get overfitted and be less robust. In this way,
we use a dynamic stride sampling strategy to sample interleaved data, which provides thousands of
times more valid data sequences (a bar of 25% overlap rate) than naive consecutive sampling.
3.3
BOTTOM-UP KEYFRAME-CONDITIONED VIDEO GENERATION
Our framework bridges two complementary viewpoints. From a bottom-up perspective, we begin
with a base video generator and expand its scope to long-form content by conditioning on a se-
quence of interleaved shots. From a top-down perspective, we first construct a sparse set of narrative
keyframes that act as visual anchors, then instruct the generator to fill the intervals between them.
Unifying these perspectives allows us to preserve local visual fidelity while maintaining global nar-
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
...
[Shot 1] wide shot of Bruce and Alfred
[Shot 2] medium shot of Joker standing
[Shot 3] close-up of hand on display
[Shot 4] medium shot of Bruce sitting 
[Shot 5] Joker gazing at a viewscreen
[Shot 6] exterior shot of the spaceship
[Shot 7] docking of space station
[Shot 24] wide shot of a spectacular
[Shot 17] seated opposite in Cafe
[Shot 18] Joker facing to camera talking
[Shot 19] Bruce looking resolutely
[Shot 21] Joker takes the control panel
[Shot 22] low-angle close-up of Bruce
[Shot 23] low-angle shot of spaceship
[Shot 20] medium close-up Bruce in helmet
...
[Shot 8] B & A looking out viewport
Expansion of [Shot 23]
Figure 6: Qualitative results. From the narrative prompt “An interstellar voyage with Bruce Wayne,
the Joker, and Alfred Pennyworth,” Gemini 2.5 Pro composes shot-level descriptions that guide our
top-down key-frame generator, yielding the storyboard panels shown above. Each text–key-frame
pair then conditions our bottom-up video model, which synthesises the full multi-scene film. The
figure highlights twenty-four representative shots demonstrating sustained narrative coherence, char-
acter fidelity, and visual style across the entire production. Video demo is in the supplementary.
rative coherence throughout the entire video. Given K keyframes {I1, . . . , IK}, each the first frame
of its shot, we condition a diffusion generator on (i) the tiled global caption ctiled and (ii) the visual
embeddings of all keyframes:
Vk =
n
Ik, Gθ
 I1:K, ctiled, t = 2:Tk
o
,
k = 1, . . . , K,
where Gθ outputs frames fk,2, . . . , fk,Tk for shot k. Multi-key conditioning thus anchors appearance
at shot boundaries and enforces seamless motion dynamics across shots, generating videos that
preserve narrative intent, visual details, and temporal coherence with strong visual consistency.
4
EXPERIMENT
Experimental Setup. We finetune Flux 1.Dev (Labs, 2024) on our interleaved movie dataset (de-
scribed in §3.1) for interleaved keyframe generation. All keyframe models are trained for 40,000
steps with a batch size of 32 using 32 H100 GPUs. For interleaved video generation, we adopt
Seaweed-3B (Seawead et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025) as the base model and finetune it with multi-
frame interleaved conditioning for 15,000 steps using 256 H100 GPUs. Additional implementation
details are provided in the appendix. The keyframes are cropped with max area to 400x800 resolu-
tion without aspect ratio changes while the video generation data processing resizes all the videos to
an approximation area of 230,040 total pixels. More implementation details of training our bottom-
up and top-down keyframe and video generation models are provided in Section A.
4.1
MAIN RESULTS
Qualitative results. Fig. 6 shows a qualitative result with a storyline generated by Gemini 2.5.
Specifically, we first prompt Gemini to generate a sequence of long-form captions describing a
storyline inspired by Bruce Wayne, Alfred Pennyworth, and Joker, and interstellar travel. We then
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
No Warmup
Over Warmup (Step 80K)
Moderate Warmup (Step 40K)
Figure 7: Progressive long-context finetuning needs modest warmup. As the base model (FLUX
1.Dev) is a distillation model with guidance, it requires progressive finetuning with growing context
length to warmup the model. However, over warmup can also lead the model to forget the distilled
knowledge for high-quality keyframe generation, generating artifacts or messy textures. Picking a
proper warm-up length is therefore important for long context tuning.
(a) Multi-frame Finetuning Makes 
Less Artifacts 
(b)  Context-aware “World” 
Generation 
(c)  Smooth Camera 
Movement
Figure 8: Disentangled task modeling makes robust movie generation. With the high-quality
keyframes generated by our top-down keyframe generation model, the bottom-up video generation
model can now focus on motion dynamics. The generation performs higher temporal consistency,
world-context awareness and smoother camera movement.
use our interleaved top-down keyframe generation model to generate shot-wise keyframes based
on the narrative. Finally, we construct interleaved text–keyframe pairs from the generated content
and use them as conditioning input for the LCT generation model to produce the final movie. The
results demonstrates compelling qualitative performance in the aspects of visual quality, consistency
and semantic alignment with prompts. We also provide additional qualitative results of keyframe
generation in Section G and also multi-scene movie results in the supplementary material.
Method
Visual
Temporal
Semantic
User Study
Aesthetic↑Quality↑Consistency↑Dynamic↑
Text↑
Quality↑Semantic↑
IC-LoRA (Huang et al., 2024a)
54.1
60.5
88.7
61.1
23.1
1.5
2.3
LCT (Guo et al., 2025)
56.2
59.9
94.8*
51.8
23.9
2.4
3.1
Ours (w/o MF-FT)
56.8
60.9
91.9
64.4
25.7
2.8
3.5
Ours
57.2
61.7
91.0
65.4
26.1
3.3
3.7
Table 1: Quantitative Evaluation & User Study. We employ automatic metrics and average human
ranking (AHR). “Consistency” represents the average score of subject and background consistency.
*: Most video clips show low temporal dynamic but perform high TC score (Zheng et al., 2025).
Quantitative Evaluation & User Study. We follow VBench-2.0 (Zheng et al., 2025) to eval-
uate visual and temporal aspects, and follow the LCT (Guo et al., 2025) protocol for assessing
text–semantic alignment. A user study is conducted using a 4-point scale—Very Good, Good, Poor,
and Very Poor—focusing on semantic alignment and overall visual quality. As few works target
long-video generation, we primarily compare against two closely related baselines: LCT and IC-
LoRA (Huang et al., 2024a) combined with I2V (Seawead et al., 2025). To ensure a fair comparison,
we use GPT-4o to format consistent scene prompts and generate videos across all methods. Tab. 1
shows that our approach performs favorably across most metrics, a finding corroborated by user
studies evaluating video quality and semantic relevance. Notably, our advantages are most evident
for generating coherent and vivid motion over long sequences in cinematic content creation.
Long-context stress test. We evaluate robustness as the context window grows from 8→48 in-
terleaved pairs. For each setting we generate 20 clips and ask Gemini Flash 2.5 to score Consis-
tency, Quality, Diversity, and Narrative Coherence; and another Identity Consistency metric used in
VBench-2.0. As context length increases, LCT quality degrades sharply (Tab. 2), whereas ours re-
tains >93% of its consistency even at 48 pairs, validating the effectiveness of GoldenMem ( Fig. 11).
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Consistency
Visual Quality
Diversity
Narrative
Identity
Method
Ctx. Pairs Character Scene Visual Aesthetic
Diversity Nar. Coher.
Identity
LCT (Guo et al., 2025)
8
4.3
3.5
4.8
4.1
3.0
2.8
0.43
LCT (Guo et al., 2025)
16
3.6
3.4
4.5
3.9
2.5
2.8
0.31
LCT (Guo et al., 2025)
24
3.1
0.7
1.6
1.6
1.7
0.6
0.14
Ours
8
4.9
3.9
4.9
4.7
4.5
4.0
0.51
Ours
16
4.8
3.8
4.9
4.6
4.2
3.8
0.47
Ours
24
4.6
3.8
4.9
4.6
4.2
3.6
0.42
Ours
32
4.5
3.8
4.9
4.6
3.9
3.4
0.37
Ours (w/ G.Mem)
16
4.6
3.8
4.9
4.6
4.2
3.8
0.44
Ours (w/ G.Mem)
32
4.6
3.5
4.7
4.6
4.0
3.5
0.35
Ours (w/ G.Mem)
48
4.5
3.0
4.7
4.5
3.9
3.3
0.31
Table 2: Long-Context Stress Test. We exhibit long context stress test to benchmark the robustness
of long context generation. We use Gemini 2.5 Flash to rate the generation quality in multiple
aspects (detailed in Section H), and an automatic identity consistency metric introduced in VBench
2.0. Our interleaved method with GoldenMem can do high-quality long context generation with
strong consistency preservation of both characters and scenes.
# Pairs
GoldenMem
Compute
Visual
Text
# Groups × Images
PFLOPS (Est.)
Quality↑
Consistency↑
Alignment↑
16-frame
–
30
4.4
4.7
4.1
16-frame
3 × 4
21
4.3
4.3
4.1
32-frame
–
55
4.1
4.3
3.8
32-frame
3 × 8
35
3.9
4.2
3.6
48-frame
–
OOM
–
–
–
48-frame
3 × 12
52
3.6
4.2
3.5
Table 3: GoldenMem makes longer context with less computation. The first row of each block is
the baseline while the second row is using GoldenMem. GoldenMem uses less computation with
performance preservation and processes longer context window without out-of-memory (OOM).
Compute is estimated through #tokens×steps×FLOP/token.
4.2
ABLATION STUDIES
From Short to Long: Progressive Long-context Finetuning.
As detailed in §3.2, we employ
progressive long-context fine-tuning, gradually expanding the context window of the interleaved
keyframe generator. Fig. 7 shows that directly fine-tuning the FLUX base model leads to training
collapse. On the other hand, fine-tuning from a late checkpoint (step 80,000; half of the target
context length) also produces visual artifacts, which is likely caused by the knowledge forgetting for
the FLUX distillation base model. So, progressive finetuning with FLUX-like distillation models
needs a modest warmup (i.e., step 40,000) to avoid training collapse or forgetting distilled guidance.
GoldenMem: Compressed Long-Context Memory. As detailed in §3.2, we downsample his-
torical visual context at the pixel level in inverse Fibonacci sequence, thereby capping the overall
number of visual tokens. Tab. 3 ablates this design with different number of interleaved pairs. Gold-
enMem demonstrates strong compute efficiency under the same visual context, performing minor
visual quality and consistency degradation. Moreover, GoldenMem enables longer context window
(i.e., from 32 to 48 without OOM), which keeps longer context history for long video generation.
Robust Long Video Generation with Disentangled Task Modeling. As detailed in §3.2, we fine-
tune a pretrained MM-DiT video generator (Seawead et al., 2025) with multi-frame interleaved con-
ditioning to serve as our bottom-up component. Coupled with the top-down interleaved keyframe
generator, this design improves robustness, yielding fewer artifacts (Fig. 8a), consistent environment
dynamics—e.g., burning ruins with rising smoke (Fig. 8b)—and smooth camera motion with sta-
ble character identities (Fig. 8c). These results demonstrate that disentangling high-level narrative
planning from low-level motion synthesis enables efficient and robust long-video generation.
Dynamic Strided Data Sampling. Because the scale of our movie dataset is relative small to
the data used for base-model pre-training, na¨ıve sampling induces rapid overfitting and weak gen-
eralization, particularly under sparse keyframe conditioning and limited interleaved samples. We
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
…
…
…
…
Condition Noise Scale
Figure 9: Visual context conditioning needs moderate noise injection. Each conditioning frame
has individually been injected with random noise at varying levels: 1st: 751∼1000; 2nd: 501∼750;
3rd: 251∼500; 4th: 1∼250. Context conditioning with moderate noise lead to better consistency.
(a) Creative scene generation. Batman is locked in
prison while Joker takes control of Gotham.
(b) Cross-movie character swapping. Bruce Wayne
and Alfred Pennyworth appear in “Interstellar.”
Figure 10: Captain Cinema generalization abilities. Trained on high-quality, richly annotated
interleaved data, our model offers creative control at the movie, scene, and character levels, allowing
limitless “parallel universes” that maintain coherent narratives and high visual fidelity.
mitigate this by introducing a dynamic strided sampling scheme that systematically offsets the sam-
pling stride across epochs. This strategy yields 100 times more valid data when sample 16-frame
sequence from 32 frames (25% keyframe-overlap threshold).
Noisy visual context conditioning. During our interleaved keyframes generation model training,
each frame is applied with individual level of noise. So, we ablate the noise level for keyframe
extending generation with a given context of noisy latents. As shown in Fig. 9, our interleaved
keyframe generation model fails to keep character consistency when conditioning on context with
large noise injection (i.e. 501∼1000 steps). However, our model shows very strong character consis-
tency when using moderate noise level (i.e. 1∼500 steps) and shows best character facial perserva-
tion when using a small noise (i.e. adding 1∼250 timesteps of noise) for long context conditioning.
We also evaluate out-of-domain generalization to unseen characters in Section I.
4.3
GENERALIZATION ABILITIES
Creative Scene Generation. Our method could synthesize novel scenes that were never present
in the training corpus by recombining familiar characters, settings, and plot elements. Leveraging
semantic-oriented retrieval and interleaved conditioning, it produces imaginative environments, e.g.,
a prison-bound Batman confronting the Gotham under Joker’s control, while preserving visual fi-
delity and narrative plausibility through one-stage generation. Our model effectively understands
character traits, typical settings, and plausible interactions, enabling seamless integration of new
creative ideas into cohesive, realistic scenes. Our model could extend any scene through context
conditioning and continue story-telling with characters and scenes consistency.
Cross-Movie Character Swapping. Our pipeline also enables seamless swapping of characters
across unrelated cinematic universes. Leveraging identity-preserving embeddings, the system can
insert Bruce Wayne and Alfred Pennyworth into the science-fiction environment of Interstellar. This
capability demonstrates a clear separation between character identity and scene context, providing a
flexible platform for counterfactual narrative exploration.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
5
CONCLUSION
We propose Captain Cinema, based on top-down interleaved keyframe planning with bottom-up,
multi-keyframe-conditioned video synthesis to generate a short movie. Leveraging the Golden-
Mem compressed visual context, progressive long-context fine-tuning, and dynamic strided sam-
pling training strategies, our model sustains global narrative coherence while preserving local visual
fidelity throughout feature-length videos. Captain Cinema also demonstrates generalization ability
for creative scene generation and cross-movie character swapping. Despite the limitations discussed
above, our work represents a concrete step toward fully automated, story-driven movie generation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Long-form video generation could democratize high-quality animation, documentary creation, ed-
ucation, and simulation, enabling content production that previously demanded extensive budgets
and expertise. This technology also provides valuable tools for individuals with limited mobility
or resources and offers new avenues for reinforcement learning and robotics simulations. How-
ever, accessible video generation also raises concerns around hyper-realistic misinformation, non-
consensual media, intellectual-property violations, and environmental impact due to high compu-
tational costs. To mitigate these risks, we will adopt gated model releases, implement robust wa-
termarking, provide model documentation, and enforce clear usage policies. Additionally, we will
develop watermark verification tools, conduct external red-team audits, and collaborate with stake-
holders on content detection benchmarks. All the data here are used for research only purpose.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We include all the key details including training hyperparameters, data collection and processing
procedure, evaluation and annotation prompt etc.
REFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
model for few-shot learning. In NeurlPS, 2022.
Roman Bachmann, Jesse Allardice, David Mizrahi, Enrico Fini, O˘guzhan Fatih Kar, Elmira Amir-
loo, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Amir Zamir, and Afshin Dehghan. FlexTok: Resampling images into
1d token sequences of flexible length, 2025.
Breakthrough.
Pyscenedetect
v0.6.
https://github.com/Breakthrough/
PySceneDetect, 2021. Python-based video scene detection library.
Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, et al. Video generation models as world simulators, 2024.
Jerome Bruner. The narrative construction of reality. Critical inquiry, 18(1):1–21, 1991.
Shengqu Cai, Ceyuan Yang, Lvmin Zhang, Yuwei Guo, Junfei Xiao, Ziyan Yang, Yinghao Xu,
Zhenheng Yang, Alan Yuille, Leonidas Guibas, Maneesh Agrawala, Lu Jiang, and Gordon Wet-
zstein. Mixture of contexts for long video generation. In ICLR, 2026.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao P Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
diffusion. In CVPR, 2023.
Boyuan Chen, Diego Mart´ı Mons´o, Yilun Du, Max Simchowitz, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent Sitz-
mann.
Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion.
Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:24081–24125, 2024a.
Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang, Jinbo Xing,
Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, et al. Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-
quality video generation. In arXiv, 2023.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying
Shan. Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models. In
CVPR, 2024b.
Xi Chen, Zhiheng Liu, Mengting Chen, Yutong Feng, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, and Hengshuang Zhao.
Livephoto: Real image animation with text-guided motion control. In ECCV, 2025.
Runpei Dong, Chunrui Han, Yuang Peng, Zekun Qi, Zheng Ge, Jinrong Yang, Liang Zhao, Jianjian
Sun, Hongyu Zhou, Haoran Wei, et al. Dreamllm: Synergistic multimodal comprehension and
creation. In arXiv, 2023.
Ruoyu Feng, Wenming Weng, Yanhui Wang, Yuhui Yuan, Jianmin Bao, Chong Luo, Zhibo Chen,
and Baining Guo. Ccedit: Creative and controllable video editing via diffusion models. In CVPR,
2024.
Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Alex Fang, Jonathan Hayase, Georgios Smyrnis, Thao
Nguyen, Ryan Marten, Mitchell Wortsman, Dhruba Ghosh, Jieyu Zhang, et al. Datacomp: In
search of the next generation of multimodal datasets. In NeurlPS, 2024.
Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Jinguo Zhu, Yixiao Ge, Kun Yi, Lin Song, Chen Li, Xiaohan Ding, and Ying
Shan. Seed-x: Multimodal models with unified multi-granularity comprehension and generation.
In arXiv, 2024.
Google Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805.
Yuchao Gu, Weijia Mao, and Mike Zheng Shou. Long-context autoregressive video modeling with
next-frame prediction, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19325.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Ziyan Yang, Zhibei Ma, Zhijie Lin, Zhenheng Yang, Dahua Lin, and
Lu Jiang. Long context tuning for video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10589, 2025.
Yoav HaCohen, Nisan Chiprut, Benny Brazowski, Daniel Shalem, Dudu Moshe, Eitan Richardson,
Eran Levin, Guy Shiran, Nir Zabari, Ori Gordon, Poriya Panet, Sapir Weissbuch, Victor Kulikov,
Yaki Bitterman, Zeev Melumian, and Ofir Bibi. Ltx-video: Realtime video latent diffusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.00103, 2024a.
Yoav HaCohen, Nisan Chiprut, Benny Brazowski, Daniel Shalem, Dudu Moshe, Eitan Richardson,
Eran Levin, Guy Shiran, Nir Zabari, Ori Gordon, et al. Ltx-video: Realtime video latent diffusion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00103, 2024b.
Yuval Noah Harari. Sapiens: A brief history of humankind. Random House, 2014.
Yingqing He, Menghan Xia, Haoxin Chen, Xiaodong Cun, Yuan Gong, Jinbo Xing, Yong Zhang,
Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, Ying Shan, et al.
Animate-a-story: Storytelling with retrieval-
augmented video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06940, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
video generation with diffusion models. In arXiv, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
Fleet. Video diffusion models. In NeurlPS, 2022b.
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
training for text-to-video generation via transformers. In arXiv, 2022.
Lianghua Huang, Wei Wang, Zhi-Fan Wu, Yupeng Shi, Huanzhang Dou, Chen Liang, Yutong
Feng, Yu Liu, and Jingren Zhou.
In-context lora for diffusion transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.23775, 2024a.
Nisha Huang, Yuxin Zhang, and Weiming Dong. Style-a-video: Agile diffusion for arbitrary text-
based video style transfer. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 2024b.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang,
Yang Song, Yadong Mu, and Zhouchen Lin. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video genera-
tive modeling, 2024.
Dan Kondratyuk, Lijun Yu, Xiuye Gu, Jos´e Lezama, Jonathan Huang, Grant Schindler, Rachel
Hornung, Vighnesh Birodkar, Jimmy Yan, Ming-Chang Chiu, et al. Videopoet: A large language
model for zero-shot video generation. In ICML, 2024.
Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux, 2024.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, 2023a.
Yanghao Li, Haoqi Fan, Ronghang Hu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Kaiming He.
Scaling
language-image pre-training via masking. In CVPR, 2023b.
Han Lin, Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Videodirectorgpt: Consistent multi-scene
video generation via llm-guided planning. In COLM, 2024.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In NeurlPS,
2024.
Yaofang Liu and Rui Liu. Pusa: Thousands timesteps video diffusion model, 2025. URL https:
//github.com/Yaofang-Liu/Pusa-VidGen.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In ICCV, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In NeurlPS, 2022.
Team Seawead, Ceyuan Yang, Zhijie Lin, Yang Zhao, Shanchuan Lin, Zhibei Ma, Haoyuan Guo,
Hao Chen, Lu Qi, Sen Wang, et al. Seaweed-7b: Cost-effective training of video generation
foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08685, 2025.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
data. In arXiv, 2022.
Quan Sun, Yuxin Fang, Ledell Wu, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. Eva-clip: Improved training
techniques for clip at scale. In arXiv, 2023a.
Quan Sun, Qiying Yu, Yufeng Cui, Fan Zhang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yueze Wang, Hongcheng Gao,
Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Emu: Generative pretraining in multimodality.
In ICLR, 2023b.
Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Xiaosong Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qiying Yu, Yueze Wang, Yongming Rao,
Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative multimodal models are in-context
learners. In CVPR, 2024.
Changyao Tian, Xizhou Zhu, Yuwen Xiong, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Wenhai Wang, Yuntao Chen,
Lewei Lu, Tong Lu, Jie Zhou, et al. Mm-interleaved: Interleaved image-text generative modeling
via multi-modal feature synchronizer. In arXiv, 2024a.
Ye Tian, Ling Yang, Haotian Yang, Yuan Gao, Yufan Deng, Jingmin Chen, Xintao Wang, Zhaochen
Yu, Xin Tao, Pengfei Wan, et al. Videotetris: Towards compositional text-to-video generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04277, 2024b.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ee
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aur´elien Rodriguez, Ar-
mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2302.13971.
Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Mod-
elscope text-to-video technical report. In arXiv, 2023.
Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Jiannan Wu, Xizhou Zhu, Gang Zeng, Ping Luo, Tong
Lu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, et al. Visionllm: Large language model is also an open-ended decoder for
vision-centric tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024a.
Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Zhengxiong Luo, Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Jinsheng Wang, Fan
Zhang, Yueze Wang, Zhen Li, Qiying Yu, et al. Emu3: Next-token prediction is all you need. In
arXiv, 2024b.
Junfei Xiao, Feng Cheng, Lu Qi, Liangke Gui, Jiepeng Cen, Zhibei Ma, Alan Yuille, and Lu Jiang.
Videoauteur: Towards long narrative video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06173, 2024.
Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang, Jiashi
Feng, and Mike Zheng Shou. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation
using diffusion model. In CVPR, 2024.
Shuai Yang, Yuying Ge, Yang Li, Yukang Chen, Yixiao Ge, Ying Shan, and Yingcong Chen. Seed-
story: Multimodal long story generation with large language model. In arXiv, 2024a.
Shuai Yang, Yuying Ge, Yang Li, Yukang Chen, Yixiao Ge, Ying Shan, and Yingcong Chen.
Seed-story: Multimodal long story generation with large language model.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08683, 2024b.
Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang,
Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models
with an expert transformer. In arXiv, 2024c.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Packing input frame context in next-frame prediction models
for video generation, 2025.
Canyu Zhao, Mingyu Liu, Wen Wang, Jianlong Yuan, Hao Chen, Bo Zhang, and Chunhua Shen.
Moviedreamer: Hierarchical generation for coherent long visual sequence.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.16655, 2024.
Dian Zheng, Ziqi Huang, Hongbo Liu, Kai Zou, Yinan He, Fan Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Jingwen
He, Wei-Shi Zheng, Yu Qiao, et al. Vbench-2.0: Advancing video generation benchmark suite
for intrinsic faithfulness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21755, 2025.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. In arXiv, 2022.
Yupeng Zhou, Daquan Zhou, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jiashi Feng, and Qibin Hou.
Storydiffu-
sion: Consistent self-attention for long-range image and video generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.01434, 2024.
Ziqin Zhou, Yifan Yang, Yuqing Yang, Tianyu He, Houwen Peng, Kai Qiu, Qi Dai, Lili Qiu, Chong
Luo, and Lingqiao Liu. Hitvideo: Hierarchical tokenizers for enhancing text-to-video generation
with autoregressive large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11513, 2025.
Shaobin Zhuang, Kunchang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, and Yali Wang.
Vlogger: Make your dream a vlog. In CVPR, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
APPENDIX
Please visit the webpage in supplementary material for viewing a set of video demos
and understand the model capabilities.
A
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We provide the training hyperparameters for the top-down keyframe generation model and the in-
terleaved conditioned video generation model in Tab. 4. The interleaved auto-regressive model is
trained on interleaved image-text pairs with a default resolution of 400 × 800, using a batch size
of 32 and bfloat16 precision. It employs AdamW as the optimizer, with a peak learning rate of
2 × 10−4 and a cosine decay schedule, training for 2,500 steps. Training context pairs vary between
2 and 8, while inference always uses 8 pairs for consistency. The visual-conditioned video genera-
tion model processes video data at an area of 480x480 ( 230,400 total pixels), with a batch size of 64
and bfloat16 precision. It uses AdamW with a peak learning rate of 1 × 10−5 and a constant decay
schedule, training for 20,000 steps to handle temporal conditioning effectively. We provide the train-
ing hyperparameters for the top-down keyframe generation model and the interleaved conditioned
video generation model in Tab. 4 The interleaved auto-regressive model is trained on interleaved
image-text pairs with a default resolution of 400 × 800, using a batch size of 32 and bfloat16 preci-
sion. It employs AdamW as the optimizer, with a peak learning rate of 2 × 10−4 and a cosine decay
schedule, training for 2,500 steps. Training context pairs vary between 2 and 8, while inference
always uses 8 pairs for consistency. The visual-conditioned video generation model processes video
data at an area of 480x480 ( 230,400 total pixels), with a batch size of 64 and bfloat16 precision.
It uses AdamW with a peak learning rate of 1 × 10−5 and a constant decay schedule, training for
20,000 steps to handle temporal conditioning effectively.
Configuration
Keyframe Generation Model
Video Generation Model
Resolution
400 × 800 × L
(480P, native AR) × T
Optimizer
AdamW
AdamW
Optimizer hyperparameters
β1=0.9, β2=0.999, ϵ=10−8
β1=0.9, β2=0.95, ϵ=10−8
Peak learning rate
4 × 10−4
1 × 10−4
Learning-rate schedule
Linear warm-up, cosine decay
Linear warm-up, cosine decay
Gradient clip
1.0
1.0
Training steps
20,000 (per stage)
10,000 (total)
Warm-up steps
500
1,000
Batch size
16
≈64
Numerical precision
bfloat16
bfloat16
Computation
32 × H100, ∼72 h
256 × H100, ∼200 h
Table 4: Implementation details of our models. The left column lists the interleaved keyframe
generator settings, and the right column lists the visual-conditioned video generator settings.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
B
DATA ANNOTATION PROMPT
You are a film-director assistant annotating a single frame from the movie.
1. Detailed Caption
• Describe visual composition, lighting, and camera angles.
• Note character actions, expressions, and positioning.
• Mention setting details and atmosphere.
2. Character Identification
• Identify characters only when absolutely certain, enclosing names in angle brackets
(e.g. ¡Character Name ). Allowed list: ¡Character List¿.
• If uncertain, describe by appearance, role, or action—do not use angle brackets.
• For dual-identity roles, choose the name that matches the on-screen persona.
3. Level of Detail
• Craft concise yet thorough sentences capturing technical aspects (framing, lighting)
and narrative elements (interactions, mood).
• Focus on specifics that make the frame distinctive.
C
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF GOLDENMEM
GoldenMem can be interpreted as a budgeted multi-scale memory over the history of keyframes.
Let the newest frame be encoded at short side s0 and let the i-th previous frame be stored at scale
si = ⌊s0/ϕi⌋, where ϕ = (1 +
√
5)/2. Up to integer rounding and the minimum latent size, the
corresponding token count satisfies ti ≈t0ϕ−2i because the latent is partitioned into fixed-size
patches. A naive memory that stores n frames at full resolution requires Tnaive(n) = nt0 tokens,
while GoldenMem requires
TGM(n) =
n−1
X
i=0
ti ≈t0
n−1
X
i=0
ϕ−2i = t0
1 −ϕ−2n
1 −ϕ−2 < ϕt0 ≈1.618t0.
Hence, GoldenMem turns linear memory growth into a constant-factor overhead over the most recent
full-resolution frame. Since the dominant attention cost is quadratic in the number of conditioning
tokens, the memory-dependent attention complexity drops from O((nt0)2) to O((ϕt0)2). The quali-
tative implication is that GoldenMem allocates fidelity according to recency: recent frames preserve
dense spatial detail, whereas older frames retain coarse but semantically useful scene and identity
anchors. Tab. 3 is consistent with this analysis, showing that the same design extends the context
window from 32 to 48 frames without out-of-memory while maintaining similar generation quality.
D
FURTHER EXPLANATION ON CONTEXT SELECTION AND SEMANTIC
RETRIEVAL
For each target keyframe with caption yt, we build a candidate set from all previous memory entries
{(xj, yj)}j<t and rank them by semantic relevance instead of pure temporal distance. The default
score is CLIP text-to-image similarity,
rj = sim(f text
CLIP(yt), f img
CLIP(xj)),
and the selected history is the highest-scoring subset that fits the GoldenMem budget. To avoid
saturating the memory with redundant frames, we suppress obvious near-duplicates from the same
shot and retain context that covers complementary visual states. This design addresses a common
ambiguity in long movies: captions repeatedly mention the same characters, camera types, or emo-
tions, so several earlier frames may be lexically compatible with the current caption even when they
belong to different scenes. Pure text-to-text retrieval can therefore over-match repeated wording
and return a semantically related but visually mismatched scene. By grounding the query against
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
historical images, CLIP retrieval better disambiguates recurring characters and scene revisits while
still allowing non-local context such as flashbacks or foreshadowing. When several candidates are
nearly tied, we only use recency as a tie-breaker, which preserves local continuity without collapsing
the retrieval to a purely temporal heuristic.
E
LONG CONTEXT STRESS TEST
This is to provide the additional charts for the long context stress test. We evaluate robustness as the
context window grows from 8→48 interleaved pairs. For each setting we generate 20 clips and ask
Gemini Flash 2.5 to score Consistency, Quality, Diversity, and Narrative Coherence; and another
Identity Consistency metric used in VBench-2.0. As context length increases, LCT quality degrades
sharply (Tab. 2), whereas ours retains > 93% of its consistency even at 48 pairs, validating the
effectiveness of GoldenMem (Fig. 11).
(a) Consistency
(b) Visual Quality
(c) Diversity
(d) Narrative Coherence
Figure 11: Long-Context Stress Test. While context length grows to be very long, our method
still maintains strong visual consistency, high visual quality, diversity, and narrative coherence even
under extended context lengths.
F
HYBRID ATTENTION MASKING IN TRAINING AND INFERENCE.
The local mask is fixed across training and inference: the first D double-stream blocks always use
a block-diagonal mask, so each image-text pair performs within-pair fusion before any cross-pair
interaction. The distinction appears only in the subsequent S single-stream blocks. During training,
we use a fully bidirectional global mask because the entire interleaved sequence is available and
the objective is to learn symmetric long-range dependencies across all pairs. During inference, the
model supports two regimes. For offline storyboard generation, where the captions of the whole
sequence are given in advance and all frames are sampled jointly, we keep the same bidirectional
global mask and perform diffusion-forcing style denoising; this is the setting used for the 32-frame
qualitative examples in Appendix Sec. G. For online extension or autoregressive movie continuation,
we replace the global mask with an upper-triangular causal mask so that the current pair only attends
to previously generated pairs and never to future ones. No causal masking is applied inside the local
double-stream blocks because causality is relevant only to cross-pair dependencies, not to fusion
within a fully observed pair. Thus, the architecture is unchanged between training and inference;
only the global inter-pair mask is switched according to whether future pairs are available.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
G
ADDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS FOR KEYFRAME GENERATION.
We provide non-cherry pick qualitative keyframe generation results in figures below.
Figure 12: Qualitative Result. Our method shows superior generation quality with character and
scene consistency. 32 frames are generated by our method through diffusion forcing with bidirec-
tional masking strategy. The prompt here is from the validation split with ChatGPT-4o re-imagined.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 13: Qualitative Result. Our method shows superior generation quality with character and
scene consistency. 32 frames are generated by our method through diffusion forcing with bidirec-
tional masking strategy. The prompt here is from the validation split with ChatGPT-4o re-imagined.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 14: Qualitative Result. Our method shows superior generation quality with character and
scene consistency. 32 frames are generated by our method through diffusion forcing with bidirec-
tional masking strategy. The prompt here is from the validation split with ChatGPT-4o re-imagined.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 15: Qualitative Result. Our method shows superior generation quality with character and
scene consistency. 32 frames are generated by our method through diffusion forcing with bidirec-
tional masking strategy. The prompt here is from the validation split with ChatGPT-4o re-imagined.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
H
LONG-CONTEXT STRESS TEST DETAILS
We evaluate the robustness of our model under long-range dependencies by scoring sequences of
keyframes—both ground-truth and those sampled from our generated clips— with Gemini 2.5 Flash.
Guided by the system prompt in Section H, the evaluator rates each sequence along six dimensions:
character consistency, scene consistency, visual quality, aesthetics, diversity, and narrative coher-
ence. An overview of the per-aspect trends is visualised in Fig. 11, and the complete results for a
range of context lengths are reported in Tab. 2.
SYSTEM PROMPT
You are an expert visual analyst.
You will receive a sequence of movie keyframes (static images)
and must evaluate them in six aspects:
1. Character Consistency
2. Scene Consistency
3. Visual Quality
4. Aesthetics
5. Diversity (no duplicate or near-duplicate frames)
6. Narrative Coherence (does the sequence form a sensible mini-story?)
For each aspect, assign a 0{5 score and provide a one-sentence
justification.
Score meanings:
| Score | Meaning
|
|-------|---------------------------------------------|
| 0
| Unacceptable: completely fails expectations |
| 1
| Very Poor: major problems
|
| 2
| Poor: noticeable flaws
|
| 3
| Fair: meets basic expectations
|
| 4
| Good: solid, minor imperfections
|
| 5
| Excellent: flawless or near-perfect
|
Scoring rules
- Character Consistency: clothing, hairstyle, facial features,
and proportions
remain constant.
- Scene Consistency: lighting and background elements stay coherent
across
frames.
- Visual Quality: frames are sharp, well-exposed, and color-balanced.
- Aesthetics: composition, color palette, and contrast are deliberate
and pleasing.
- Diversity: frames are meaningfully distinct; penalize repetition.
- Narrative Coherence: frames suggest a logical progression; penalize
abrupt shifts.
Return valid JSON in the following structure:
{
"character_consistency": { "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" },
"scene_consistency":
{ "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" },
"visual_quality":
{ "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" },
"aesthetics":
{ "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" },
"diversity":
{ "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" },
"narrative_coherence":
{ "score": <0-5>, "justification": "<text>" }
}
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
I
OUT-OF-DOMAIN IDENTITY PRESERVATION GENERALIZABILITY
We assess our model’s ability to preserve unseen identities under noisy conditioning. For each out-
of-domain individual, we collect 16 photographs with accompanying captions. Twelve images serve
as interleaved context; their visual embeddings are perturbed with Gaussian noise for robust con-
ditioning. The remaining four captions are then used to prompt the model, which must synthesize
four new frames of the same person. Qualitative results are shown in Figs. 16 and 18 (generation
with different dressing) and Figs. 17 and 19 (generation with different dressing). Our interleaved
keyframe generator effectively maintains identity and accurately follows the given prompting in-
struction (appearance descriptions), demonstrating strong generalization to unseen characters.
Figure 16: Out-of-domain Identity-Preservation Test : Different Dressing. Each test case begins
with 12 randomly sampled context images that are injected with noise; the model then generates
another four frames conditioned on textual prompts as well as the pretext interleaved conditions.
Our interleaved key-frame generator accurately maintains the character’s identity, demonstrating
strong out-of-domain generalizability.
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 17: Out-of-domain Identity-Preservation Test : Same Dressing. Each test case begins
with 12 randomly sampled context images that are injected with noise; the model then generates
another four frames conditioned on textual prompts as well as the pretext interleaved conditions.
Our interleaved key-frame generator accurately maintains the character’s identity, demonstrating
strong out-of-domain generalizability.
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 18: Out-of-domain Identity-Preservation Test : Different Dressing. Each test case begins
with 12 randomly sampled context images that are injected with noise; the model then generates
another four frames conditioned on textual prompts as well as the pretext interleaved conditions.
Our interleaved key-frame generator accurately maintains the character’s identity while follows the
instruction prompts, demonstrating strong identity preservation ability to out-of-domain characters.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 19: Out-of-domain Identity-Preservation Test : Same Dressing. Each test case begins
with 12 randomly sampled context images that are injected with noise; the model then generates
another four frames conditioned on textual prompts as well as the pretext interleaved conditions.
Our interleaved key-frame generator accurately maintains the character’s identity, demonstrating
strong out-of-domain generalizability.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
J
DIFFERENCE TO FRAMEPACK
Framepack (Zhang & Agrawala, 2025) is a concurrent work on arXiv (confirmed with the authors),
which proposes a similar token compression mechanism through context history down-sampling
with exponential ratios (e.g., 1, 2, 4 ...). Below are explanations to several major difference in the
aspects of motivation, applied scenario, technical design and empirical performance.
Motivation. While we share a similar goal to reduce the GPU memory usage, Framepack motivation
is to enable consumer level GPU to be capable of large video generation model finetuning. Our
movitation is to extend longer context as memory for preserving visual consistency.
Applied scenario. Framepack still focuses on classic single video clip generation and the training
task is like image editing at first (generate last frames) and then do first-last frame video interpola-
tion, which is illustrated in Fig. 20. Framepack supports motion difference with a major entity across
frames but do not support scene moving or even scene changing. In contrast, our method is designed
for multi-scene long video generation and the GoldenMem focuses on discrete keyframe generation
whose task is more complex and challenging frame-level generation, illustrated in Fig. 21.
1
N
N-1
N-2
N-3
N-4
1
N
N-1
N-2
N-3
N-4
Figure 20: Framepack firstly edits, then interpolates. Framepack still focuses on classic single-
clip video generation but in an anti-drifted auto-regressive way – firstly generates last frames, and
then interpolates the middle frames given the context of the first frame and last frames.
Technical design. Framepack uses aggressive compression rate for context compression (down-
sample ratio is 2 or 4) with larger group sizes and introduces additional convolution kernels for the
compression operation. In contrast, we use a fixed number frames for each group of context and use
the fibonacci ratio (∼1.618) for history downsampling in pixel space directly.
Empirical performance. We follow the typical context compression setup proposed in Framepack
f1k1f2k2f16k4 for an empirical comparison to replace our GoldenMem compression setup un-
der the 32-frame generation setting. As Framepack’s downsampling ratio and strategy is more ag-
gressive, we see worse visual consistency and visual quality than our GoldenMem setup and even
slower convergence. So, we believe GoldenMem design is currently a more optimal solution for
long-context multi-scene keyframe generation in a discrete way.
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 21: GoldenMem is designed for multi-scene discrete generation. GoldenMem needs to
understand and align different scenes and characters for keeping visual consistency and also keep
high visual quality. In contrary to continuous frame interpolation, our method is for discrete cross-
scene keyframe generation which is more complex and challenging.
27