--- Page 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
SAC FLOW:
SAMPLE-EFFICIENT REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING OF FLOW-BASED POLICIES VIA VELOCITY-
REPARAMETERIZED SEQUENTIAL MODELING
Yixian Zhang1∗, Shu’ang Yu2, 4∗, Tonghe Zhang3, Mo Guang4, Haojia Hui4, Kaiwen Long4,
Yu Wang2, Chao Yu1†, Wenbo Ding1†
1SIGS, Tsinghua University
2EE, Tsinghua University
3Carnegie Mellon University
4Li Auto
5Shanghai AI Laboratory
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding Authors
{yuchao,ding.wenbo}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Figure 1: An Overview of SAC Flow. The multi-step sampling process of flow-based policies
frequently causes exploding gradients during off-policy RL updates. Our key insight is to treat the
flow-based policy as a sequential model, for which we first demonstrate an algebraic equivalence to
an RNN. We then reparameterize the flow’s velocity network using modern sequential architectures
(e.g., GRU, Transformer). Our approach stabilizes off-policy RL training and achieves state-of-the-
art performance.
ABSTRACT
Training expressive flow-based policies with off-policy reinforcement learning is
notoriously unstable due to gradient pathologies in the multi-step action sampling
process. We trace this instability to a fundamental connection: the flow rollout is
algebraically equivalent to a residual recurrent computation, making it susceptible
to the same vanishing and exploding gradients as RNNs. To address this, we repa-
rameterize the velocity network using principles from modern sequential models,
introducing two stable architectures: Flow-G, which incorporates a gated velocity,
and Flow-T, which utilizes a decoded velocity. We then develop a practical SAC-
based algorithm, enabled by a noise-augmented rollout, that facilitates direct end-
to-end training of these policies. Our approach supports both from-scratch and
offline-to-online learning and achieves state-of-the-art performance on continuous
control and robotic manipulation benchmarks, eliminating the need for common
workarounds like policy distillation or surrogate objectives. Anonymized code is
available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SAC-FLOW.
.
1

--- Page 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1
INTRODUCTION
Flow-based policies have shown strong potential on challenging continuous-control tasks, including
robot manipulation, due to their ability to represent rich, multimodal action distributions (Black
et al., 2024; Lipman et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2025). Early successes predominantly arose in imitation
learning, where a flow-based policy is trained to reproduce expert behavior from static datasets
(Luo et al., 2025; Tarasov et al., 2025). However, pure behavior cloning is fundamentally limited:
dataset coverage is often sparse and of mixed quality (Kim et al., 2024; Garcia et al., 2025), and
the lack of environment interaction prevents exploration, making it difficult to exceed demonstrator
performance on hard tasks (Belkhale et al., 2023; Zare et al., 2024).
A natural next step is to train flow-based policies with reinforcement learning. On-policy variants of
PPO adapted to flows have demonstrated strong returns, yet they remain sample-inefficient (Schul-
man et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2025). Off-policy methods promise much higher data efficiency and
early integrations with flow-based policies on MuJoCo and DeepMind Control show encouraging
results (Todorov et al., 2012; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2025; Park et al., 2025). How-
ever, these successes typically come with design compromises that leave a central issue unresolved.
Either the update relies on surrogate objectives that avoid differentiating through the rollout of the
original flow, or the flow is distilled into a simpler one-step actor that can be optimized with standard
off-policy losses. Both strategies reduce gradient stress but decouple optimization from the expres-
sive generator and tend to blunt the benefits of multimodal flow-based policies (Park et al., 2025; Lv
et al., 2025).
We propose a different viewpoint: treat the flow-based policy as a sequential model. Concretely,
we show that the Euler integration used to generate actions in the flow-based policy is algebraically
identical to the recurrent computation of a residual RNN. This observation explains the instability
observed with off-policy training: the same vanishing or exploding gradients known to affect RNNs
also afflict the flow rollout. Building on this link, we reparameterize the vanilla velocity network
with the cell of modern sequential models that are designed to stabilize deep recurrent computa-
tions. We introduce two such novel designs of the flow-based policy: Flow-G, which incorporates a
GRU-style gated velocity to regulate gradient flow across rollout steps, and Flow-T, which utilizes a
Transformer-style decoded velocity to refine the action-time token via state-only cross-attention and
a residual feed-forward network.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• A sequential model perspective for stable flow-based policies. We formalize the K-step
flow rollout as a residual RNN computation, providing a clear theoretical explanation for
the gradient pathologies that cause instability in off-policy training. This insight allows
us to reparameterize the velocity network with modern sequential architectures, leading to
two novel, stable designs: Flow-G (GRU-gated) and Flow-T (Transformer-decoded). Our
approach resolves critical gradient pathologies, enabling direct end-to-end optimization and
eliminating the need for surrogate objectives or policy distillation.
• A practical and sample-efficient SAC framework for flow policies. We develop SAC
Flow, a robust off-policy algorithm built upon our stabilized architectures. By introducing a
noise-augmented rollout, we enable tractable likelihood computation for the SAC objective,
a key technical hurdle. This approach yields two robust training procedures: (i) a stable
from-scratch trainer for dense-reward tasks and (ii) a unified offline-to-online pipeline for
sparse-reward tasks.
• Extensive experimental evaluation.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of SAC Flow
across multiple benchmarks. In from-scratch training on challenging MuJoCo tasks, our
approach delivers performance gains of up to 130% over strong baselines. Furthermore, in
complex offline-to-online manipulation tasks on OGBench, it achieves up to a 60% higher
success rate. These results empirically validate the superior sample efficiency of our direct
off-policy training approach, with ablation studies further confirming the robustness of our
designs.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2
PRELIMINARIES
2.1
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
We consider policy optimization in an infinite-horizon Markov decision process ⟨S, A, p, r, ρ⟩with
continuous state and action spaces. The transition function p : S × A × S →[0, ∞) specifies the
transition probability density, and rewards are rh = r(sh, ah) ∈[rmin, rmax], where ah is sampled
from the policy π(·|sh). The objective of reinforcement learning is to learn an optimal policy π∗
that maximizes the expected cumulative reward, π∗= arg maxπ Eπ P∞
h=0 γhrh

.
2.2
SOFT ACTOR-CRITIC ALGORITHM
To encourage policies to maintain stochasticity and explore more effectively, the standard objective
is augmented with an entropy term, ˆJ(π) = Eπ[P∞
h=0 γh(rh + αH)], where H(π(· | sh)) =
−Ea∼π(·|sh) [log π(a | s)] denotes the state-conditional policy entropy.
In this setting, the Soft
Actor-Critic algorithm (Haarnoja et al., 2018) is introduced to optimize this objective. The tar-
get ˆJ(π) is typically approximated with the soft Q-function Qψ(sh, ah), which is updated through
the TD loss:
L(ψ) =

Qψ (sh, ah) −(rh + γQ ¯
ψ (sh+1, ah+1) −α log πθ (ah+1 | sh+1))
2 ,
(1)
where ah+1 ∼πθ (· | sh+1), (sh, ah, sh+1, rh) are sampled from the replay buffer, and ¯ψ is a
delayed copy of ψ through which gradients do not flow for stability. To maximize the soft Q-
function Qψ(sh, ah), the policy πθ is updated through
L(θ) = α log πθ
 aθ
h | sh

−Qψ
 sh, aθ
h

,
aθ
h ∼πθ (· | sh) .
(2)
Here, aθ
h highlights a reparameterized action sample that allows gradients to propagate from the
policy to the action, in contrast to the TD update, where the action is detached.
2.3
FLOW-BASED POLICY IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Gaussian policies are the standard choice in continuous-control RL (Yang et al., 2021; Ziesche &
Rozo, 2024), yet a single unimodal Gaussian cannot capture inherently multimodal action distri-
butions. This limitation is especially harmful in long-horizon robotic control, as such tasks often
benefit from policies that output temporally extended actions (i.e., “action chunking”) (Li et al.,
2025). The distribution over these action sequences is often inherently multimodal, which a uni-
modal Gaussian fails to represent. Diffusion policies alleviate this by modeling arbitrary normal-
izable distributions and have achieved state-of-the-art results on manipulation benchmarks (Bekris
et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2024), but their iterative denoising makes both training and
inference expensive. Recently, flow-based policies have emerged as a simpler alternative: trained
with flow-matching objectives, they offer easier training and faster inference while often matching
or exceeding diffusion quality (Lipman et al., 2022; Park et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025).
A flow-based policy transports a simple, state-conditioned base p0(· | s) over the action space
A = Rd to a target policy p1(· | s) via a time-indexed map ϱ : [0, 1]×A×S →A, with At :=
ϱt(A0 | s) for t ∈[0, 1], where A0 ∼p0(· | s) and A1 ∼p1(· | s). The trajectory satisfies the ODE
d
dtϱt(A0 | s) = v(t, ϱt(A0 | s), s), where v is a learnable velocity field. We adopt Rectified Flow
(Liu et al., 2022), which uses the straight path At = (1 −t)A0 + tA1 and the standard Gaussian
base p0(· | s) = N(0, Id). In this case v(t, At, s) =
d
dtAt = A1 −A0, yielding the flow-matching
objective
ˆθ = arg min
θ
EA0∼N(0,Id), (A1=a,s)∼D,
t∼Unif[0,1]
hA1 −A0 −vθ(t, (1 −t)A0 + tA1, s)
2
2
i
,
(3)
where D denotes the dataset of state–action pairs. In inference, the learned field is integrated nu-
merically with flow rollout to obtain:
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti vθ(ti, Ati, s),
0 = t0 < · · · < tK = 1,
(4)
where ∆ti = ti+1 −ti. The resulting distribution over A1 induced by A0 ∼N(0, Id) is denoted
µθ(· | s) and serves as the stochastic policy a = A1 ∼πθ(· | s).
3

--- Page 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Flow-based policies can be trained offline from demonstrations using Equ. (3), and they can also
be optimized with RL. On-policy methods (e.g., PPO-style training tailored to flows (Zhang et al.,
2025; Ren et al., 2024; Psenka et al., 2024)) attain strong performance on challenging robotics tasks
but remain sample-inefficient. Off-policy methods (e.g., SAC, TD3) are highly sample-efficient
(Mambelli et al., 2024), yet directly backpropagating through the K-step action sampling is often
unstable, especially for large K (Park et al., 2025). To mitigate this, prior work either distills a
flow-based policy into a simpler actor trained with standard off-policy losses (Park et al., 2025) or
proposes surrogate off-policy objectives that train the velocity field without differentiating through
the full flow rollout (Lv et al., 2025).
We take a different route. We recast the flow rollout as a sequential model and redesign the velocity
parameterization accordingly. We introduce Flow-G, which uses a GRU-style gated velocity, and
Flow-T, which uses a Transformer-style decoded velocity. These parameterizations stabilize the K-
step backpropagating and allow direct off-policy training of the flow-based policy. We instantiate
the framework with SAC, and the same formulation applies to other off-policy algorithms.
3
FROM FLOW ROLLOUT TO SEQUENTIAL MODELS
Figure 2: An illustration of gradient norms during training. By conceptualizing a flow-based model
as an RNN, the most basic sequential models, we observe that it still suffers from the exploding
gradients during training. This motivates our work to model the flow-based model as advanced
sequential architectures, such as a GRU or a Transformer. These models can be updated with stable
gradients during the backpropagation process.
In this section, we reveal a key insight: flow-based policies are fundamentally sequential models.
As conceptually illustrated in Fig. 2, standard flow rollouts exhibit gradient instabilities analogous
to vanilla RNNs, while modern sequential architectures offer more stable gradient flow, motivating
our velocity network designs.
Flow-based policy as RNN (Fig. 3a).
Treat the intermediate action Ati as the hidden state and
(ti, s) as the input. Then Equ. (4) is a residual RNN step (Goel et al., 2017):
Ati+1 = Ati + fθ(ti, Ati, s),
with fθ(·) = ∆ti vθ(·),
(5)
where fθ(·) denotes the RNN cell. Consequently, training a flow-based policy with off-policy losses
backpropagates through a deep recurrent stack of K updates in RNN, which is prone to gradient
explosion and vanishing (Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013). This explains the instability
observed when naively applying off-policy reinforcement learning to standard flow-based policies.
Flow-based policy as GRU (Flow-G, Fig. 3b).
To improve gradient stability, we endow the
velocity with a GRU-style update gate. Let gi = Sig
 zθ(ti, Ati, s)

and let ˆvθ be a candidate
network. Define
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti
 gi ⊙(ˆvθ(ti, Ati, s) −Ati)

,
(6)
where ⊙denotes elementwise multiplication and Sig(·) is the logistic sigmoid. Equ. (6) is exactly
a flow sampling step with gated velocity vθ = gi ⊙(ˆvθ −Ati), which mirrors the structure of the
update in a GRU cell but expressed in the velocity parameterization used by the flow rollout. The
gate network gi adaptively interpolates between keeping the current intermediate action and forming
a new one.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Flow-based policy as Transformer (Flow-T, Fig. 3c).
We parameterize the velocity function vθ
using a Transformer architecture conditioned on the environment state s. To maintain the Markov
property of the flow, we depart from a traditional causal, autoregressive formulation. Instead, the
model first computes independent embeddings for the current action-time token Ati and a single,
global embedding for the state s:
ΦAi = EA
 ϕt(ti), Ati

,
ΦS = ES
 ϕs(s)

,
(7)
where EA and ES are linear projections. Within the Decoder layers, a diagonal mask is applied to
the self-attention mechanism, effectively reducing it to a position-wise transformation that processes
each token ΦAi independently, without mixing information across the time steps i. The crucial step
for context integration is a dedicated cross-attention module, where each action token ΦAi queries
the shared state embedding ΦS. A stack of L pre-norm residual blocks refines the action tokens:
Y (l)
i
= Φ(l−1)
Ai
+ Crossl

LN(Φ(l−1)
Ai
), context = LN(ΦS)

, Φ(l)
Ai = Y (l)
i
+ FFNl
 LN(Y (l)
i
)

, (8)
for layers l = 1, . . . , L, where Φ(0)
Ai := ΦAi. Each block is completed by a feed-forward network,
and the final representation is projected to the velocity space:
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti Wo

LN(Φ(L)
Ai )

,
(9)
where Wo is a linear projection and vθ(ti, Ati, s) = Wo

LN(Φ(L)
Ai )

is the decoded velocity in
Flow-T. Each velocity evaluation therefore executes L layers that refine the current action token
ΦAi based on the global state context from ΦS, not on a causal history of other tokens. This state-
conditioned refinement of the entire trajectory maintains the fundamental Markov property of flow-
based policy while enabling stable integration with off-policy learning algorithms.
Takeaway for off-policy reinforcement learning.
Equ. (5) establishes that a standard flow rollout
is a residual recurrent computation. Introducing a gate network leads to Flow-G in Equ. (6), which
improves gradient stability. Replacing the velocity with the normalized residual block in Equ. (9)
yields Flow-T. This architecture provides well-conditioned depth and, crucially, aggregates context
with the well-established Transformer architectures.
The core technical motivation is to stabilize the recurrent computation in Equ. (5), which suffers
from the exploding/vanishing gradient problem due to unstable Jacobian products during backprop-
agation. Our Flow-G and Flow-T designs directly mitigate this via stabilizing mechanisms. A
detailed mathematical analysis of this instability and our solution is provided in Appendix B.
These parameterizations serve as drop-in replacements for vθ in Equ. (4) without altering the sur-
rounding algorithm. As a result, they enable direct and stable off-policy training with methods such
as SAC, remove the need for auxiliary distillation actors and surrogate objectives, and keep flow
rollout efficient at test time.
4
TRAINING FLOW-BASED POLICY VIA SAC
With gradient stability achieved through our sequential parameterizations (Flow-G and Flow-T), we
can now train flow-based policies directly with off-policy reinforcement learning. The key technical
challenge is computing policy likelihoods for the K-step rollout in Equ. (4)—a requirement for the
entropy-regularized objective in SAC. We solve this through a principled noise-augmented rollout
that preserves the final action distribution while enabling tractable per-step likelihood computation.
Likelihood via a noise-augmented rollout.
SAC requires explicit policy likelihoods for entropy
regularization, but the deterministic K-step rollout in Equ. (4) yields intractable densities. We
address this by making the rollout stochastic while preserving the marginal of the final action, which
induces a product of per-step Gaussian transitions and a tractable joint path density pc(A | s) over
intermediate actions A = (At0, . . . , AtK). The construction details are deferred to Appendix A;
here we use the resulting log pc(A | s) as a drop-in entropy term.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Flow-based Policy as
RNN
(b) Flow-based Policy as GRU
(c) Flow-based Policy as
Transformer
Figure 3: Velocity network parameterizations for the flow-based policy, shown in the view of se-
quential models. (a) RNN Cell: It represents the standard flow-based policy where the velocity vθ
is the direct output of a neural network. This simple formulation is prone to gradient instability. (b)
GRU Cell: The velocity is computed using a GRU-style gated mechanism. A gate gi adaptively
controls the update strength from a candidate network ˆvi, which stabilizes gradient flow. (c) De-
coder: The velocity is modeled using a Transformer decoder, where the action-time token Ati is
refined through L layers of state-conditioned cross-attention to produce a decoded velocity.
From-scratch training.
With tractable likelihoods established, the SAC losses become straight-
forward. Given a critic Qψ and a flow-based policy πθ (with Flow-G or Flow-T as vθ), we optimize:
Lactor(θ) = α log pc(Aθ | sh) −Qψ
 sh, aθ
h

,
Aθ ∼πθ(· | sh), aθ
h = tanh(Aθ
tK),
(10)
Lcritic(ψ) =
h
Qψ(sh, ah) −
 rh + γ Q ¯
ψ(sh+1, ah+1) −α log pc(Ah+1 | sh+1)
i2
,
(11)
where (sh, ah, rh, sh+1) comes from the replay buffer, Ah+1, ah+1 ∼πθ(· | sh+1), and ¯ψ is a
delayed copy.
Offline-to-online training.
For sparse-reward tasks where expert demonstrations are available, we
modify the actor loss to include a proximity regularizer:
Lo
actor(θ) = α log pc(Aθ | sh) −Qψ(sh, aθ
h) + β ∥aθ
h −ah∥2
2,
(sh, ah) ∼B.
(12)
This approach begins with flow-matching pretraining on expert data via Equ. (3), then transitions
to online learning while maintaining proximity to the replay buffer. The complete procedures are
summarized in Algos. 1 and 2.
Algorithm 1 SAC Flow (from scratch)
1: Initialize critic Qψ, target Q ¯
ψ, flow-based policy πθ with Flow-G or Flow-T; replay buffer B.
2: for each update do
3:
Interact with the environment using πθ; push (st, at, rt, st+1) to B.
4:
Sample {(sh, ah, rh, sh+1)}N
h=1 ∼B.
5:
Actor: draw aθ
h by a K-step noisy rollout; minimize Equ. (10).
6:
Critic: minimize Equ. (11); update target by an exponential moving average.
7: end for
For clarity, we refer to our methods as SAC Flow-G and SAC Flow-T, corresponding to training
with Flow-G and Flow-T via SAC, respectively. Both terms apply to both from-scratch and offline-
to-online training variants.
5
EXPERIMENT
We conduct extensive experiments on locomotion and manipulation benchmarks to validate our
approach. The evaluation encompasses: (1) experimental setup and baseline comparisons for from-
scratch and offline-to-online training, (2) performance benchmarking of SAC Flow-G and SAC
6

--- Page 7 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Algorithm 2 SAC Flow (offline-to-online)
1: Initialize Qψ, Q ¯
ψ, πθ; set B ←Dexpert.
2: for ℓ= 1 to Loff + Lon do
3:
if ℓ> Loff then
4:
Interact with the environment using πθ; append to B.
5:
end if
6:
Sample {(sh, ah, rh, sh+1)}N
h=1 ∼B.
7:
Actor: minimize Equ. (12) with aθ
h from the noisy rollout.
8:
Critic: minimize Equ. (11); update the target network.
9:
if ℓ≤Loff then
10:
Flow-matching pretraining via Equ. (3).
11:
end if
12: end for
(a) Hopper-v4
(b) Walker2D-v4
(c) HalfCheetah-v4
(d) Ant-v4
(e) Humanoid-v4
(f) HumanoidStandup-v4
Figure 4: From-scratch training performance. Our SAC Flow-T and SAC Flow-G achieve compara-
ble or better performance accross all tasks except Humanoid (Fig. (a)-(f)), demonstrating significant
sample efficiency and convergence stability.
Flow-T against recent methods, and (3) ablation studies analyzing the effectiveness of our design
components. All results are averaged over 5 random seeds and use the 95% confidence interval.
5.1
SETTINGS
5.1.1
ENVIRONMENTS AND OFFLINE DATASETS
We evaluate our method on three benchmarks for locomotion and robotic manipulation: Mu-
JoCo (Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al., 2016), OGBench (Park et al., 2024), and
Robomimic (Mandlekar et al., 2021). MuJoCo tasks, which feature dense rewards, are used to
evaluate from-scratch learning performance. Then we conduct offline-to-online experiments on OG-
Bench and Robomimic, using their respective official offline datasets1.
1OGBench:
https://github.com/seohongpark/ogbench,
Robomimic:
https:
//robomimic.github.io/docs/datasets/robomimic_v0.1.html
7

--- Page 8 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Cube-Double-Task
(b) Cube-Triple-Task
(c) Cube-Quadruple-Task
(d) Robomimic
Figure 5: Aggregated offline-to-online performance on OGBench and Robomimic benchmarks.
Each curve shows the mean success rate averaged across multiple task instances within a domain.
Specifically, the OGBench results for Cube-Double, Triple, and Quadruple (a-c) are each aggre-
gated over five distinct single-task environments. The Robomimic result (d) is aggregated across
the Lift, Can, and Square tasks.
5.1.2
BASELINES
For the from-scratch training, we compare SAC-Flow against five baselines. (1) Q-score matching
(QSM) (Psenka et al., 2024) directly optimizes the diffusion policy’s score function using the gra-
dient of the Q-function. (2) DIME (Celik et al., 2025) is a representative max-entropy RL method
for diffusion policy, addressing the challenge of entropy calculation. (3) FlowRL (Lv et al., 2025)
is the state-of-the-art (SOTA) method, which trains a flow-based policy by directly maximizing the
Q-value, regularized by a Wasserstein-2 constraint. Finally we apply two classical RL algorithms:
(4) SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and (5) PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), with Gaussian policies as
fundamental from-scratch baselines.
To evaluate the offline-to-online capability, we select three baselines, including on-policy and off-
policy methods. (1) ReinFlow (Zhang et al., 2025) solves the difficulty of calculating log probability
through multi-step flow inference, enabling on-policy PPO update for flow-based policy. It should
be noted that ReinFlow is only tested in Robomimic due to a lack of official implementation for its
use in OGBench. (2) Flow Q-Learning (FQL) (Park et al., 2025) uses SAC-style update to achieve
high data-efficient RL tuning. FQL uses a one-step policy to estimate the flow model, avoiding the
instability of backpropagation through time. And its successor, (3) Q-chunking FQL (QC-FQL)
(Li et al., 2025), extends FQL to handle action chunking by operating in temporally extended action
spaces.
Among all experiments, the sampling steps of flow-based policies are set to 4, and the denoising
steps of diffusion policies are set to 16. More details of the experimental setting are described in
Appendix D and Appendix E.
5.2
MAIN RESULTS
Fig. 4 illustrates the results for from-scratch training. Our methods, SAC Flow-G and SAC Flow-T,
achieve superior or comparable performance across most MuJoCo tasks, with the exception of Hu-
manoid. Although DIME and FlowRL generally converge faster than other baselines, our methods
consistently surpass FlowRL, benefiting from direct optimization of the SAC objective. Further-
more, SAC Flow outperforms DIME in Hopper (Fig. 15a), Walker (Fig. 15b), and HumanoidStandup
(Fig. 4f), while achieving comparable results in HalfCheetah (Fig. 15c) and Ant (Fig. 15d). More-
over, with the expressive parameterization of flow-based policy, our method achieves much higher
final performance in challenging tasks, demonstrating up to a 130% improvement over the baseline
(Fig. 4f), and remains convergence stability in simple tasks (Fig. 15a, 15b, and 15c). For reference,
we include the on-policy baseline, PPO, to highlight the superior sample efficiency of off-policy
algorithms. Finally, we find that all from-scratch methods struggle in tasks with large exploration
spaces and sparse rewards, such as Robomimic-Can and OGBench-cube (see Appendix F.1, Fig. 14),
underscoring the necessity of an offline-to-online training setting.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Fig. 5 shows the offline-to-online training performance in sparse reward tasks. All methods are
trained on 1M offline updates followed by 1M online steps. In the challenging OGBench environ-
ments, including cube-triple and cube-quadruple, our proposed methods, particularly SAC Flow-T,
achieve rapid convergence and attain a state-of-the-art overall success rate. In the Robomimic envi-
ronment, however, SAC Flow-T and SAC Flow-G only yield results comparable to QC-FQL. This
is primarily because the training is strictly regularized with a large β value (Equ. (12)). As a result,
the learning capacity of the flow model is severely limited, causing its performance to be similar
to that of the one-step policy in QC-FQL. We further compare the on-policy baseline, Reinflow,
in Robomimic. Leveraging the high data efficiency of off-policy learning, our SAC Flow-G and
SAC Flow-T outperform Reinflow under 1M online steps. The additional results are available in
Appendix F.
5.3
ABLATION STUDY
(a) Ant-v4
(b) Ant-Step 0
(c) Ant-Step 1
(d) Ant-Step 2
(e) Ant-Step 3
(f) Walker2d-v4
(g) Walker2d-Step 0
(h) Walker2d-Step 1
(i) Walker2d-Step 2
(j) Walker2d-Step 3
(k) Hopper-v4
(l) Hopper-Step 0
(m) Hopper-Step 1
(n) Hopper-Step 2
(o) Hopper-Step 3
(q) Ant-v4 - Ratio
(r) Walker2d-v4 - Ratio
(s) Hopper-v4 - Ratio
Figure 6: Ablation study on velocity network parameterizations. Our SAC Flow-T and SAC Flow-
G significantly reduce the gradient exploding and enable stable training. The first column (a, f, k)
displays the episodic return for the environments. The subsequent four columns illustrate the gra-
dient norms for steps 0 through 3 of the flow sampling process, respectively. The bottom row (q–s)
visualizes the gradient norm ratio (Naive / Flow-G), revealing that across all tasks, the Naive gra-
dient norm explodes to approximately tenfold the stable magnitude around the time of performance
collapse (105 steps).
9

--- Page 10 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ablation study on velocity network parameterizations.
We begin by analyzing the gradient dy-
namics of our proposed architectures, SAC Flow-G and SAC Flow-T. We benchmark these against a
Naive SAC Flow baseline that utilizes a standard MLP velocity parameterization without sequential
modeling. As illustrated in the first three rows of Fig. 6, the naive baseline exhibits severe gradient
pathologies, characterized by erratic norm oscillations along the backpropagation path (specifically
from sampling step k = 3 back to k = 0). In contrast, our methods maintain well-conditioned
gradient norms across the entire rollout. This instability in the Naive SAC Flow directly precipitates
performance degradation, as evidenced by its failure to learn in the Ant, Walker2d, and Hopper.
(Figs. 6a, 6f, and 6k).
To provide a unified explanation despite the varying absolute gradient scales across tasks (e.g.,
gradients in Ant are naturally larger than in Walker2d), we further analyze the relative stability by
computing the gradient norm ratio (Naive SAC Flow / SAC Flow-G), shown in the bottom row of
Fig. 6 (q–s). This metric reveals a striking consistency: across all distinct tasks, the gradient norm
of the Naive baseline escalates to approximately tenfold that of the stable SAC Flow-G. Crucially,
this 10-fold relative explosion typically peaks around 105 steps, which aligns perfectly with the
inflection point where the Naive baseline’s performance stagnates and begins to deteriorate. These
empirical results conclusively validate that the standard flow rollout suffers from severe relative
gradient instability, and our sequential reparameterizations effectively mitigate this issue to enable
stable training.
Ablation study on flow sampling steps.
Fig. 7 shows the performance of SAC FLow-T and SAC
Flow-G under sampling steps K = 4, 7, 10. A larger number of sampling steps can further challenge
the stability of gradient backpropagation. The experiments show that our approach, especially SAC
Flow-T, is robust to the number of sampling steps.
(a) Ant-v4
(b) Cube-Double-Task4
Figure 7: Ablation study on flow sampling steps. Our SAC Flow-G and SAC Flow-T are robust to
the number of sampling steps.
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce SAC Flow, a sample-efficient and high-performance off-policy RL al-
gorithm for flow-based policies. SAC Flow addresses the issue of gradient instability in training
flow-based policies by treating the flow-based model as a sequential model and reparameterizing its
velocity network as a GRU or a Transformer. We evaluate the performance of SAC Flow in both
from-scratch and offline-to-online training settings. SAC Flow demonstrates rapid convergence and
achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple locomotion and manipulation tasks.
Looking forward, we will validate SAC Flow on real robots and explore lighter sequential param-
eterizations with structure-aware updates, while studying sim-to-real robustness, tighter stability
guarantees, and risk-aware objectives for reliable deployment.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ETHICS STATEMENT
We adhere to the ICLR Code of Ethics. Our research introduces foundational RL algorithms evalu-
ated exclusively on public benchmarks and datasets. This work does not involve human subjects or
sensitive data and presents no foreseeable direct ethical concerns.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, additional implementation details, hyperparameters, and experimental
results are provided in the Appendix. All experiments leverage public benchmarks and datasets.
The anonymous code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SAC-FLOW
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Yuze Sheng for assistance with the real-robot experiments of SAC Flow.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62406159,
62325405), Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (No. KJZD20240903100905008), Zhong-
guancun Academy (Grant No. C20250301), Beijing National Research Center for Information Sci-
ence and Technology (BNRist), Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chips, and Ant Group.
REFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Lars Ankile, Anthony Simeonov, Idan Shenfeld, Marcel Torne, and Pulkit Agrawal. From imitation
to refinement-residual rl for precise assembly. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, pp. 01–08, 2025.
Kostas Bekris, Kris Hauser, Sylvia Herbert, Jingjin Yu, Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric
Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy:
Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
44(10–11):1684–1704, 2025.
Suneel Belkhale, Yuchen Cui, and Dorsa Sadigh. Data quality in imitation learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:80375–80395, 2023.
Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient
descent is difficult. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 5(2):157–166, 1994.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo
Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow
model for general robot contro. ArXiv Preprint, 2024.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. ArXiv Preprint, 2016.
Onur Celik, Zechu Li, Denis Blessing, Ge Li, Daniel Palenicek, Jan Peters, Georgia Chalvatzaki,
and Gerhard Neumann. Dime: Diffusion-based maximum entropy reinforcement learning. ArXiv
Preprint, 2025.
Shutong Ding, Ke Hu, Zhenhao Zhang, Kan Ren, Weinan Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Jingya Wang, and
Ye Shi. Diffusion-based reinforcement learning via q-weighted variational policy optimization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:53945–53968, 2024.
Xiaoyi Dong, Jian Cheng, and Xi Sheryl Zhang. Maximum entropy reinforcement learning with
diffusion policy. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Ricardo Garcia, Shizhe Chen, and Cordelia Schmid. Towards generalizable vision-language robotic
manipulation: A benchmark and llm-guided 3d policy. In 2025 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8996–9002, 2025.
Hardik Goel, Igor Melnyk, and Arindam Banerjee. R2n2: Residual recurrent neural networks for
multivariate time series forecasting. ArXiv Preprint, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
cations. ArXiv Preprint, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
1735–1780, 1997.
Peter Holderrieth and Ezra Erives. An introduction to flow matching and diffusion models. ArXiv
Preprint, 2025.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty, Ki-
nal Mehta, and Jo ˜AG¸ o GM Ara ˜Aˇsjo. Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of deep
reinforcement learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(274):1–18, 2022.
Sunshine Jiang, Xiaolin Fang, Nicholas Roy, Tom´as Lozano-P´erez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Sid-
dharth Ancha. Streaming flow policy: Simplifying diffusion / flow-matching policies by treating
action trajectories as flow trajectories. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Yeseung Kim, Dohyun Kim, Jieun Choi, Jisang Park, Nayoung Oh, and Daehyung Park. A survey
on integration of large language models with intelligent robots. Intelligent Service Robotics, 17
(5):1091–1107, 2024.
Qiyang Li, Zhiyuan Zhou, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with action chunking. ArXiv
Preprint, 2025.
Steven Li, Rickmer Krohn, Tao Chen, Anurag Ajay, Pulkit Agrawal, and Georgia Chalvatzaki.
Learning multimodal behaviors from scratch with diffusion policy gradient. Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 37:38456–38479, 2024.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching
for generative modeling. ArXiv Preprint, 2022.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and
transfer data with rectified flow. ArXiv Preprint, 2022.
Hao Luo, Yicheng Feng, Wanpeng Zhang, Sipeng Zheng, Ye Wang, Haoqi Yuan, Jiazheng Liu,
Chaoyi Xu, Qin Jin, and Zongqing Lu. Being-h0: vision-language-action pretraining from large-
scale human videos. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Lei Lv, Yunfei Li, Yu Luo, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Jiafeng Xu, and Xiao Ma. Flow-based policy for
online reinforcement learning. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Davide Mambelli, Stephan Bongers, Onno Zoeter, Matthijs TJ Spaan, and Frans A Oliehoek. When
do off-policy and on-policy policy gradient methods align? ArXiv Preprint, 2024.
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın. What matters in learning from offline
human demonstrations for robot manipulation. ArXiv Preprint, 2021.
Max Sobol Mark, Tian Gao, Georgia Gabriela Sampaio, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Archit Sharma,
Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Policy agnostic rl: Offline rl and online rl fine-tuning of any
class and backbone. ArXiv Preprint, 2024.
Seohong Park, Kevin Frans, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Ogbench: Benchmarking
offline goal-conditioned rl. ArXiv Preprint, 2024.
Seohong Park, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Flow q-learning. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1310–1318. Pmlr, 2013.
Michael Psenka, Alejandro Escontrela, Pieter Abbeel, and Yi Ma.
Learning a diffusion model
policy from rewards via q-score matching. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 41163–41182. PMLR, 2024.
Allen Z Ren, Justin Lidard, Lars L Ankile, Anthony Simeonov, Pulkit Agrawal, Anirudha Majum-
dar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Hongkai Dai, and Max Simchowitz. Diffusion policy policy optimiza-
tion. ArXiv Preprint, 2024.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. ArXiv Preprint, 2017.
Denis Tarasov, Alexander Nikulin, Ilya Zisman, Albina Klepach, Nikita Lyubaykin, Andrei Pol-
ubarov, Alexander Derevyagin, and Vladislav Kurenkov. Nina: Normalizing flows in action.
training vla models with normalizing flows. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033,
2012.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.
Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy
class for offline reinforcement learning. ArXiv Preprint, 2022.
Qisong Yang, Thiago D Sim˜ao, Simon H Tindemans, and Matthijs TJ Spaan. Wcsac: Worst-case soft
actor critic for safety-constrained reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 10639–10646, 2021.
Shu-Ang Yu, Feng Gao, Yi Wu, Chao Yu, and Yu Wang. D3p: Dynamic denoising diffusion policy
via reinforcement learning. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Maryam Zare, Parham M Kebria, Abbas Khosravi, and Saeid Nahavandi. A survey of imitation
learning: Algorithms, recent developments, and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
2024.
Tonghe Zhang, Chao Yu, Sichang Su, and Yu Wang. Reinflow: Fine-tuning flow matching policy
with online reinforcement learning. ArXiv Preprint, 2025.
Hanna Ziesche and Leonel Rozo. Wasserstein gradient flows for optimizing gaussian mixture poli-
cies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A
THE DERIVATION OF SAC LOSS IN THE FLOW-BASED POLICY
This appendix consolidates and expands our derivations for training SAC on a K-step flow roll-
out, including the likelihood construction via a noise-augmented rollout, the joint path density, the
pathwise score expansion, gradients for actor/critic, the temperature update, and practical notes for
implementation.
A.1
NOISE-AUGMENTED ROLLOUT AND DRIFT CORRECTION
We start from the deterministic K-step Euler rollout in Equ. (4):
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti vθ(ti, Ati, s),
0 = t0 < · · · < tK = 1.
For likelihood-based training, we convert it into a stochastic rollout that leaves the final marginal
invariant by adding isotropic Gaussian noise with a compensating drift (Holderrieth & Erives, 2025):
Ati+1 = Ati + bθ(ti, Ati, s) ∆ti + σθ
p
∆ti εi,
εi ∼N(0, Id).
(13)
A convenient drift that matches rectified-flow families is
bθ(ti, Ati, s) =
 
1 −ti + ti σ2
θ
2
1 −ti
!
vθ(ti, Ati, s) −

ti σ2
θ
2(1 −ti) ti

Ati,
(14)
with bθ(0, ·, ·) = vθ(0, ·, ·). Intuitively, the first factor inflates the learned velocity to counteract
diffusion, and the second term contracts towards the straight path so that the terminal law remains
unchanged. The detailed proof can be found on pages 28–35 in (Holderrieth & Erives, 2025).
Per-step transition.
Under Equ. (13), the conditional Ati+1 | Ati, s is Gaussian:
ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

= N

Ati + bθ(ti, Ati, s) ∆ti, σ2
θ ∆ti Id

.
We denote At0 ∼N(0, Id) as the base. The final action is a = tanh(AtK).
A.2
JOINT PATH DENSITY AND SQUASHING JACOBIAN
Let A = (At0, . . . , AtK). The joint density factorizes as
pc(A | s) = ζ(At0)
K−1
Y
i=0
ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

· ∥det J (a)∥−1,
a = tanh(AtK),
(15)
where ζ is the standard Gaussian base density for At0, ηθ(·) is the per-step transition in Section A.1,
and J (a) is the Jacobian of the element-wise tanh squashing. The marginal policy density follows
by integrating out the intermediate pre-activations:
πθ(a | s) =
Z
· · ·
Z
pc
 At0, . . . , AtK−1, AtK = tanh−1(a) | s

dAt0 · · · dAtK−1.
(16)
For element-wise tanh, ∥det J (a)∥= Qd
j=1(1 −a2
j)−1.
A.3
PATHWISE EXPANSION OF THE MARGINAL SCORE
We derive the gradient of Ea[log πθ(a | s)]. Using Equ. (15):
∇θEa[log πθ(a | s)] = ∇θEA [log πθ(a | s)]
= ∇θEA

log
Z
· · ·
Z
pc(At0, . . . , AtK−1, AtK = tanh−1(a) | s) dAt0 · · · dAtK−1

.
(17)
14

--- Page 15 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Expanding the inner gradient yields
∇θ log πθ(a | s) =
1
πθ(a | s)∇θ
Z
· · ·
Z
ζ(At0)
"K−1
Y
i=0
ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

#
∥det J (a)∥−1 dAt0:K−1
=
1
πθ(a | s)
Z
· · ·
Z
ζ(At0)
"K−1
Y
i=0
ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

#
·
K−1
X
i=0
∇θ log ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

∥det J (a)∥−1 dAt0:K−1.
(18)
Therefore,
∇θEa[log πθ(a | s)] = EA
"K−1
X
i=0
∇θ log ηθ
 Ati+1 | Ati, s; ∆ti

#
,
(19)
where the Jacobian term does not contribute because it is independent of θ. Since ηθ is Gaussian
with mean mi = Ati + bθ ∆ti and covariance Σi = σ2
θ∆tiI, each term is closed form:
∇θ log ηθ =
1
σ2
θ∆ti
 Ati+1 −mi
⊤∂mi
∂θ −d
σθ
∂σθ
∂θ + higher-order terms if σθ depends on θ.
A.4
GRADIENTS OF THE SAC LOSSES UNDER THE JOINT PATH FACTORIZATION
Critic update.
The target-matching loss is
L(ψ) =

Qψ(sh, ah) −
 rh + γQ ¯
ψ(sh+1, ah+1) −α log πθ(ah | sh)
2 ,
(20)
where ah+1 ∼πθ(· | sh+1). Using the joint-path form,
∇ψL(ψ) = 2
 Qψ(sh, ah) −
 rh + γQ ¯
ψ(sh+1, ah+1) −α log pc(A | s)

∇ψQψ(sh, ah), (21)
where no gradients flow through Q ¯
ψ. Replacing the marginal log πθ by log pc only changes a base-
line and has a negligible effect on learning behavior.
Actor update.
The actor loss is
L(θ) = α log πθ(aθ
h | sh) −Qψ(sh, aθ
h),
(22)
with aθ
h = tanh(Aθ
tK). Its gradient uses the pathwise form:
∇θL(θ) = α
K−1
X
i=0
∇θ log ηθ

Aθ
ti+1 | Aθ
ti, sh; ∆ti

−∇θQψ(sh, aθ
h),
(23)
where the Q-term differentiates through aθ
h.
A.5
PATH-REGULARIZED SOFT CRITIC
This section explains how the joint and marginal densities relate and why the resulting critic can be
naturally interpreted as a path-regularized variant of maximum-entropy RL.
A.5.1
EXACT DECOMPOSITION OF THE ENTROPY TERM
For any (s, a) with a = tanh(AtK), the joint path-density admits the factorization
pc(A | s) = πθ(a | s) rθ(A | a, s),
(24)
where rθ(A | a, s) is the conditional distribution of the latent path given the final action:
rθ(A | a, s) = pc(A | s)
πθ(a | s) ,
Z
rθ(A | a, s)dAt0:K−1 = 1.
(25)
15

--- Page 16 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Taking logarithms and averaging under rθ(· | a, s) yields the identity
Erθ(A|a,s)

log pc(A | s)

= log πθ(a | s) + h(rθ(· | a, s)) ,
(26)
where
h(rθ(· | a, s)) = −Erθ(A|a,s)[log rθ(A | a, s)]
(27)
is the differential entropy of the conditional path distribution.
Equation equation 26 shows that the expected surrogate penalty −log pc(A | s) differs from the true
negative entropy −log πθ(a | s) by exactly the path-entropy term h(rθ):
Erθ[−log pc(A | s)] = −log πθ(a | s) + h(rθ(· | a, s)).
(28)
Identity equation 28 reveals that using the surrogate −log pc(A | s) in the critic corresponds to
augmenting the original maximum-entropy objective with an additional path-entropy term:
Jours = E
h X
t
rt + α log πθ(at | st) + α h(rθ(· | at, st))
i
.
(29)
The extra entropy term encourages the conditional path distribution rθ(· | a, s) to be diffuse rather
than sharply concentrated. This induces a regularizing effect on the critic: actions whose flow
rollouts exhibit high variability (large h(rθ)) receive an additional penalty through the surrogate.
Empirically, this produces a more conservative soft Q-function and mitigates the well-known over-
estimation issues encountered in off-policy training.
A.5.2
WHY THIS IS ACCEPTABLE FOR OFF-POLICY FLOW TRAINING
It is important to emphasize that the purpose of our method is not to exactly replicate the original
SAC critic. Instead, our goal is to stabilize off-policy RL in the presence of multi-step flow roll-
outs, whose training is notoriously brittle due to compounding gradients and sensitivity to density-
evaluation errors. The path-regularized critic trades a small, well-understood bias for substantially
improved numerical stability. This trade-off is common and often desirable in deep RL, where exact
Bellman equations are rarely satisfied under function approximation.
Moreover, the actor update in our method remains an exact policy gradient for the original
maximum-entropy objective, thanks to the pathwise score expansion shown in Appendix A.3. The
bias introduced by the critic therefore does not alter the policy objective being optimized; it only
affects the value-based shaping signal used during training.
Finally, we note that the proposed flow-based policy construction (i.e., Flow-G and Flow-T) is not
specific to SAC. Methods such as TD3 rely solely on Q-function targets and do not require evaluat-
ing log policy densities. In these settings, our flow policy can be used without any entropy-related
complications. The critic design described above is only needed for maximum-entropy algorithms;
other off-policy methods can directly adopt the same flow-based actor with no additional adjust-
ments.
A.6
TEMPERATURE UPDATE (LEARNED α)
When learning α to match a target entropy ¯H:
L(α) = Esh,aθ
h∼πθ(·|sh)

−α
 log πθ(aθ
h | sh) + ¯H

.
(30)
The gradient is
∇αL(α) = −Esh,aθ
h

log πθ(aθ
h | sh) + ¯H

.
(31)
Using the joint-path surrogate yields
∇αL(α) = −E
"K−1
X
i=0
log ηθ

Aθ
ti+1 | Aθ
ti, sh; ∆ti

−log ∥det J (aθ
h)∥+ ¯H
#
,
(32)
and we set ¯H = 0 unless otherwise noted.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A.7
PRACTICAL NOTES AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Rollout length and noise. Use small K (e.g., 4) to control backprop depth and latency. Fix σθ (e.g.,
0.10) or learn a lightweight state head; fixed schedules simplify tuning.
Squashing and Jacobian. Always squash AtK 7→a = tanh(AtK) and include the exact Jacobian
in log pc of Equ. (15) to keep the entropy term correct.
Targets and normalization. Maintain a delayed target Q ¯
ψ with EMA. Pre-normalization in Flow-T
and a mild positive gate bias in Flow-G improve early stability.
Gradient flow. Flow-G gates the residual change to damp gradient amplification; Flow-T uses
pre-norm residual blocks. Both act as drop-in vθ inside Equ. (4).
Offline-to-online. In the regularized actor loss of the main text (Equ. (12)), choose β large early to
stay on-replay, then anneal as online data grows. Flow-matching pretraining via Equ. (3) is optional
but helpful for sparse rewards.
Efficiency. The entropy term scales linearly in K and action dimension d because it decomposes
into per-step Gaussian factors.
Reproducibility. We evaluate log pc and its gradient with a single noisy rollout per update; addi-
tional variance reduction is possible but not required in our settings.
B
DETAILED ANALYSIS OF GRADIENT STABILITY
This section provides a more formal mathematical justification for the gradient pathologies in stan-
dard flow-based policies (when viewed as RNNs), as discussed in Section 3, and elaborates on how
our Flow-G and Flow-T architectures address these issues.
B.1
THE VANISHING/EXPLODING GRADIENT PROBLEM IN STANDARD FLOW ROLLOUTS
As established in Equation (5), the standard K-step flow rollout Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti vθ(ti, Ati, s) is
algebraically equivalent to a residual RNN, where Ati is the hidden state and fθ(·) = ∆ti vθ(·) is
the RNN cell.
In off-policy RL, the actor loss L(θ) is a function of the final action AtK (e.g., L(θ)
=
−Qψ(sh, tanh(Aθ
tK)) from Equation (10)). To update the parameters θ of the velocity network
vθ, the gradient must be backpropagated through time (BPTT) from AtK back to At0.
Let us analyze the gradient flow. The gradient of the loss L with respect to an intermediate state Ati
is:
∇AtiL = (∇AtK L) ·
K−1
Y
j=i
∂Atj+1
∂Atj
where
∂Atj+1
∂Atj
is the Jacobian matrix of the transition:
∂Atj+1
∂Atj
=
∂
∂Atj
 Atj + fθ(tj, Atj, s)

= I + ∂fθ(tj, Atj, s)
∂Atj
Substituting this back, the gradient propagation over K steps becomes a long product of these Jaco-
bians:
∇At0L = (∇AtK L) ·
K−1
Y
i=0

I + ∂fθ(ti, Ati, s)
∂Ati

(33)
This is the core problem. As identified in the seminal work on LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997), this long product of matrices is exponentially unstable. The error signal ∇AtK L is repeatedly
multiplied by the Jacobians of the state transition.
• Exploding Gradients: If the singular values of these Jacobians are persistently greater
than 1, the norm of the gradient will grow exponentially, leading to unstable training, as
seen in our Naive baseline in Fig. 6.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• Vanishing Gradients: Conversely, if the singular values are persistently less than 1, the
norm of the gradient will shrink exponentially, preventing the error signal from AtK from
reaching the parameters that influenced At0, At1, etc. This makes learning long-term de-
pendencies impossible.
This ”gradient pathology” is the fundamental technical challenge that makes direct off-policy train-
ing of standard flow-based policies notoriously unstable.
B.2
FLOW-G AND FLOW-T AS GRADIENT STABILIZERS
To address the instability of Equation (33), the objective is to design an architecture fθ such that
the product of Jacobians remains well-conditioned, with singular values centered around 1.0. Our
Flow-G and Flow-T designs are explicitly motivated by architectures from the sequence-modeling
literature (LSTMs, GRUs, and Transformers) that were invented to solve this exact problem.
The LSTM Precedent:
The key innovation of LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) was the
Constant Error Carousel (CEC). LSTM introduced the multiplicative gates (input, forget, output),
which are then trained to learn when to allow error signals into this stable ”carousel” and when to
use the information stored within it.
Our Flow-G (GRU) and Flow-T (Transformer) architectures achieve a similar outcome through re-
lated, albeit more complex, mechanisms.
Flow-G (GRU-gated):
The Flow-G velocity (Equation 6) is vθ = gi ⊙(ˆvθ −Ati). The rollout
step becomes:
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti
 gi ⊙(ˆvθ(ti, Ati, s) −Ati)

Rewriting this per-dimension (with g(d)
i
being the d-th dimension of the gate):
A(d)
ti+1 =

1 −∆tig(d)
i

A(d)
ti + ∆tig(d)
i
ˆv(d)
θ (·)
This is precisely the update form of a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU). The Jacobian of this transition
(ignoring terms from ∂gi/∂Ati and ∂ˆvθ/∂Ati for clarity) is approximately:
∂Ati+1
∂Ati
≈I −diag(∆ti gi)
The crucial insight is that the gate gi ∈[0, 1] is a learnable parameter. If the network needs to
preserve information (and its gradient) across many steps, it can learn to set gi →0 for those steps.
When gi →0, the Jacobian
∂Ati+1
∂Ati
→I. This mimics the CEC, allowing the gradient to flow
unimpeded. Flow-G thus learns to dynamically regulate its own gradient stability, just as a GRU or
LSTM does.
Flow-T (Transformer-decoded):
The Flow-T architecture (Equations 8-9) achieves stability not
through explicit gating, but through its architectural design, which is standard in modern Transform-
ers. The Jacobian is
∂Ati+1
∂Ati
= I+∆ti
∂vθ
∂Ati . Stability hinges on ensuring the Jacobian of the velocity
network,
∂vθ
∂Ati , is well-behaved.
Flow-T accomplishes this via two key components:
1. Pre-Layer Normalization (Pre-LN): As shown in Equation (8), all inputs to the Cross-
Attention and FFN sub-layers are passed through Layer Normalization (LN(·)). Pre-LN
ensures the inputs to each layer are normalized, which has been shown to bound the mag-
nitude of activations and their gradients, leading to a much more stable and ”well-behaved”
loss landscape.
2. Residual Connections: The outputs of the Cross-Attention and FFN blocks are added to
their inputs. This residual stream, ubiquitous in modern deep learning, provides a clean
identity path for gradients to flow backward, bypassing the complex computations of the
sub-layers.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
This combination of Pre-LN and residual connections is a cornerstone of modern Transformer ar-
chitectures precisely because it stabilizes gradients in very deep networks. It ensures the spectral
norm of the velocity Jacobian, || ∂vθ
∂Ati ||, remains controlled. This achieves the same goal as the
CEC: it keeps the overall step Jacobian
∂Ati+1
∂Ati
close to the identity matrix, preventing the product
in Equation (33) from exploding or vanishing.
A Necessary Caveat:
We must emphasize that unlike the original LSTM’s Jocobian
∂ct
∂ct−1 , which
provides a provable guarantee of
∂ct
∂ct−1 = I (in its simplest form), a similar exact proof for Flow-G
and Flow-T is intractable. The non-linear complexity of the candidate networks (ˆvθ), the gates (gi
which also depend on Ati), and the multi-layer, multi-head attention blocks (in Flow-T) makes a
closed-form analysis of the full Jacobian product (Equation 33) infeasible.
However, our designs are not arbitrary. By importing these specific architectural motifs—which
were explicitly engineered in the sequence-modeling literature to solve the vanishing/exploding gra-
dient problem—we create a strong inductive bias towards gradient stability. Our architectures effec-
tively approximate a constant-norm gradient path, which is what enables stable end-to-end off-policy
optimization, as our empirical results in Figure 6 and our ablation studies robustly confirm.
C
EXTENDED RELATED WORK
We evaluate our approach against several state-of-the-art methods, categorized into two groups based
on their training paradigm. From-scratch algorithms initialize randomly and learn entirely through
environment interaction, while offline-to-online methods first pre-train on expert demonstrations
before transitioning to online reinforcement learning.
C.1
FROM-SCRATCH TRAINING METHODS
The integration of generative models into reinforcement learning has emerged as a prominent re-
search direction, with particular focus on training policies parameterized by diffusion and flow-based
models. This line of work addresses the limitations of traditional unimodal policy representations
by leveraging the expressive power of generative models to capture complex, multimodal action
distributions.
Early efforts in this domain primarily concentrated on diffusion-based policies. Q-Score Match-
ing (QSM) (Psenka et al., 2024) pioneered this direction by establishing a theoretical connection
between score functions and Q-value gradients, enabling direct policy optimization through score
matching objectives. Building upon this foundation, several advanced methods have been pro-
posed: QVPO (Ding et al., 2024) introduces Q-weighted variational policy optimization for im-
proved sample efficiency; DDiffPG (Li et al., 2024) extends policy gradient methods to diffusion
models; MaxEntDP (Dong et al., 2025) incorporates maximum entropy principles; and DIME (Ce-
lik et al., 2025) reformulates diffusion policy training through KL divergence minimization between
denoising chains and exponentiated critic targets.
More recently, attention has shifted toward flow-based policies, which offer computational advan-
tages over diffusion models through deterministic ODE integration. FlowRL (Lv et al., 2025) rep-
resents the current state-of-the-art in this category, proposing Wasserstein-2 regularized policy opti-
mization that constrains the learned policy to remain within proximity of optimal behaviors identi-
fied in the replay buffer.
For our experimental evaluation, we select DIME and FlowRL as primary benchmarks for diffusion
and flow-based approaches, respectively, based on their reported performance improvements over
earlier methods such as QVPO and QSM. We additionally include QSM in our comparison as it
established many of the foundational concepts underlying subsequent developments in this field.
Meanwhile, classical RL training methods for Gaussian policy, including PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
FlowRL (Lv et al., 2025).
This approach directly optimizes flow-based policies using off-policy
RL with Wasserstein regularization. The critic Qψ(s, a) follows standard SAC updates, minimizing
19

--- Page 20 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
the temporal difference error:
LQ(ψ) = E(s,a,r,s′)∼D
h
(Qψ(s, a) −(r + γEa′∼πθ[Qψ(s′, a′)]))2i
.
(34)
The key innovation lies in the actor update, which formulates policy optimization as a constrained
problem that maximizes Q-values while regularizing the velocity field vθ using a Wasserstein-2
distance constraint. In practice, this is solved using a Lagrangian relaxation:
Lπ(θ) = Es,a∼D,a′∼πθ
t∼U(0,1)

f(Qπβ∗(s, a) −Qψ(s, a′))∥vθ(s, At, t) −(a −a0)∥2
,
(35)
where f(·) is a non-negative weighting function, At = (1−t)a0+ta represents the flow interpolation
path, and πβ∗denotes the optimal behavior policy derived from the replay buffer. The constraint
adaptively regularizes the policy toward high-performing behaviors when Qπβ∗> Qψ, effectively
aligning the flow optimization with value-based policy improvement.
DIME (Celik et al., 2025).
This method treats diffusion policies as exponential family distribu-
tions and optimizes them via KL divergence minimization. The critic update remains standard:
LQ(ψ) = 1
2E
h
(Qψ(st, at) −Qtarget(st, at))2i
.
(36)
The actor update is more sophisticated, defining a target marginal through the exponentiated critic
¯π0(a|s) = exp(Qψ(s, a))/Zψ(s) and minimizing the KL divergence between the denoising chain
and this target:
L(θ) = Eπθ
"
log πθ(aN|s) −Qψ(s, a0) +
N
X
n=1
log πθ(an−1|an, s)
¯π(an|an−1, s)
#
.
(37)
QSM (Q-Score Matching) (Psenka et al., 2024)
This approach leverages score matching to align
the policy’s score function with the action gradient of the Q-function, providing a principled connec-
tion between value-based and score-based learning. The critic follows a double Q-learning update
with target networks for stability:
LQ(θ) = E(st,at,rt+1,st+1)∼B
"
Qθ(st, at) −

rt+1 + γ min
i=1,2 Qθ′
i(st+1, at+1)
2#
,
(38)
where Qθ′
i denotes the target networks. The actor update represents the core innovation, training a
score function Ψϕ(st, at) to match the scaled action gradient of the Q-function:
Lπ(ϕ) = E(st,at)∼B
h
∥Ψϕ(st, at) −α∇aQθ(st, at)∥2i
,
(39)
where α controls the alignment strength. This formulation enables the policy to naturally follow
the Q-function’s action gradients, providing implicit policy improvement without explicit action
sampling.
C.2
OFFLINE-TO-ONLINE TRAINING METHODS
While from-scratch training is viable for many reinforcement learning tasks, it often struggles with
sample efficiency in complex environments, particularly those with dense rewards. To address this
limitation, the offline-to-online paradigm has become a prominent approach. This strategy involves
two stages: first, pre-training a policy on an offline dataset of expert behaviors, and second, fine-
tuning this policy through online interaction with the environment.
This paradigm was initially explored with diffusion-based policies, leading to the development of
methods such as DPPO (Ren et al., 2024), D3P (Yu et al., 2025), Resip (Ankile et al., 2025), and PA-
RL (Mark et al., 2024). More recently, research has extended this approach to flow-based policies,
which are the focus of our work.
Within the flow-policy literature, methods can be categorized by their online fine-tuning algorithm.
For on-policy fine-tuning, ReinFlow (Zhang et al., 2025) stands out by successfully adapting a pre-
trained flow-based policy using the PPO algorithm. For off-policy fine-tuning, FQL (Park et al.,
20

--- Page 21 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
2025) and its successor QC-FQL (Li et al., 2025) are state-of-the-art. However, a crucial character-
istic of these off-policy methods is their reliance on an auxiliary, distilled policy for online updates;
they do not directly fine-tune the original flow model. Instead, they distill knowledge from the
pre-trained flow-based policy into a simpler, unimodal policy that is more amenable to traditional
off-policy RL.
For our experiments, we select ReinFlow, FQL, and QC-FQL as benchmarks. Our evaluation pri-
marily concentrates on the off-policy methods to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
direct fine-tuning approach for flow-based policies.
QC-FQL (Li et al., 2025)
This approach employs a three-network architecture: a critic Qθ, a one-
step noise-conditioned policy µψ, and a behavior flow-based policy fξ. The method extends FQL
to handle action chunking by operating in temporally extended action spaces. The critic processes
action sequences and is updated via:
LQ(θk) =
 
Qθk(st, at, . . . , at+h−1) −rh
t −1
K
K
X
k′=1
Q¯θk′(st+h, at+h, . . . , at+2h−1)
!2
,
(40)
where rh
t represents the cumulative discounted reward over the action chunk horizon. The one-step
policy is trained to maximize Q-values while maintaining proximity to the behavior policy outputs:
Lπ(ψ) = −Qθ(st, µψ(st, zt)) + α
µψ(st, zt) −
h
aξ
t · · · aξ
t+h−1
i
2
2 .
(41)
FQL (Park et al., 2025).
This method represents a simplified version of QC-FQL with unit action
chunks (h = 1). The critic follows standard Bellman updates while the actor combines value max-
imization with distillation regularization. The actor loss explicitly balances Q-value optimization
against behavioral constraints:
Lπ(ω) = Es∼D,aπ∼µω[−Qϕ(s, aπ)] + αEs∼D,z∼N(0,I)

∥µω(s, z) −µθ(s, z)∥2
2

,
(42)
where µθ represents a pre-trained behavioral clone used for regularization.
ReinFlow (Zhang et al., 2025)
This approach augments flow-based policies with noise injection
networks to enable efficient likelihood computation during policy gradient updates. Following a
warm-up phase for critic training, the method jointly optimizes the flow-based policy πθ and noise
injection network σθ′ through:
Lπ(θ, θ′) = E
"
−Aθold(s, a)
K−1
X
k=0
log πθ(ak+1|ak, s) + α · R(a, s; θ, θold)
#
,
(43)
where Aθold(s, a) denotes advantage estimates and R(·) provides regularization to prevent excessive
deviation from the previous policy.
Key Distinctions.
Unlike these baseline approaches, our method enables direct training the flow-
based policy via SAC (off-policy methods) without requiring auxiliary distillation actors, surrogate
objectives, or complex multi-network architectures. The Flow-G and Flow-T parameterizations
provide gradient stability while maintaining the expressive power of the original flow-based policy
throughout training.
D
EXPERIMENTAL DOMAIN
To comprehensively evaluate our method, we conduct experiments across a diverse suite of simu-
lated environments. We utilize the classic MuJoCo benchmark (Todorov et al., 2012) for standard
from-scratch reinforcement learning. To assess performance in the more challenging offline-to-
online setting, particularly with sparse rewards, we employ complex manipulation tasks from OG-
Bench (Park et al., 2024) and human-demonstration-based tasks from Robomimic (Mandlekar et al.,
2021). Visualizations of these environments are presented in Fig. 8.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Ant
(b) Humanoid
(c) HalfCheetah
(d) cube-double
(e) cube-triple
(f) cube-quadruple
(g) can
(h) square
Figure 8: Visualizations of the diverse simulation environments used for evaluation. Subfigures
(a-c) show the MuJoCo locomotion tasks. Subfigures (d-f) depict the complex, sparse-reward ma-
nipulation tasks from OGBench. Subfigures (g-h) illustrate the demonstration-based tasks from
Robomimic. This selection provides a comprehensive testbed for evaluating both from-scratch
learning and offline-to-online fine-tuning.
D.1
MUJOCO ENVIRONMENTS
We evaluate our method on six standard continuous control tasks from the MuJoCo physics sim-
ulation benchmark (Todorov et al., 2012): Hopper-v4, Walker2d-v4, HalfCheetah-v4,
Ant-v4, Humanoid-v4, and HumanoidStandup-v4. These environments feature simulated
robots with varying degrees of complexity, where the primary objective is to learn a locomotion
policy that maximizes forward velocity without falling. They serve as a standard measure of perfor-
mance for from-scratch RL algorithms.
D.2
OGBENCH ENVIRONMENTS
From
OGBench
(Park
et
al.,
2024),
we
select
four
challenging
manipulation
do-
mains using their publicly available single-task versions.
The selected domains include
cube-double/triple/quadruple tasks.
In the cube tasks, an agent must control a
UR-5 arm to place multiple objects in target locations, receiving a reward of −nwrong, where nwrong
is the number of incorrectly placed cubes. The cube-triple and cube-quadruple tasks are particularly
difficult to solve from offline data alone, providing a rigorous testbed for the sample efficiency of
offline-to-online algorithms. In the offline phase, we use the official 100M-size dataset2.
D.3
ROBOMIMIC ENVIRONMENTS
We use three robotic manipulation tasks from the Robomimic benchmark (Mandlekar et al., 2021),
utilizing the multi-human datasets which contain 300 successful demonstration trajectories per task.
The tasks are selected to represent a range of difficulties: Lift, a simple pick-and-place task in-
volving a cube; Can, an intermediate task requiring placing a can into a bin; and Square, the most
challenging task, which requires the precise insertion of a square nut onto a peg. We use the official
Multi-Human (MH) dataset, containing 300 mixed trajectories per task, for offline pre-training.
2https://github.com/seohongpark/ogbench?tab=readme-ov-file
22

--- Page 23 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 1: Details of the experimental environments. The tasks span classic continuous control with
dense rewards (MuJoCo), complex manipulation with sparse rewards (OGBench), and challenging
imitation-based tasks also framed with sparse rewards (Robomimic). This selection provides a com-
prehensive benchmark with diverse state spaces, action dimensions, and reward structures. We use
the same dataset configuration in (Li et al., 2025).
Tasks
Reward Type Dataset Size Episode Length Action Dimension
MuJoCo
Hopper-v4
Dense
/
1000
3
Walker2d-v4
Dense
/
1000
6
HalfCheetah-v4
Dense
/
1000
6
Ant-v4
Dense
/
1000
8
Humanoid-v4
Dense
/
1000
17
HumanoidStandup-v4
Dense
/
1000
17
OGBench
cube-double
Sparse
1M
500
5
cube-triple
Sparse
3M
1000
5
cube-quadruple-100M
Sparse
100M
1000
5
Robomimic
lift
Sparse
31,127
500
7
can
Sparse
62,756
500
7
square
Sparse
80,731
500
7
E
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we introduce the implementation details of the hyperparameter setting and network
structures. We first begin with the from-scratch training:
E.1
FROM-SCRATCH TRAINING SETTING
In from-scratch training, we develop our algorithm based on CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022), which
is a widely used benchmark codebase, where we also use the same implementation of PPO, SAC in
it. The hyperparameters for SAC, PPO, and DIME are available in Tab. 2, 3, and 4. For FlowRL ,
we use the official implementation except for unifying the parameter quantity. We run 5 seeds for
all experiments and all plots use a 95% confidenceinterval.
Table 2: Common Hyperparameters for SAC Algorithms
Parameter
Value
Optimizer
Adam
(b1 = 0.5 for Flow-based approaches)
Batch size (M)
512
Replay buffer size
1 × 106
Discount factor (γ)
0.99
Policy learning rate
3 × 10−4
Critic learning rate
1 × 10−3
Target network update rate (τ)
0.005 for SAC
1.0 for Flow, Flow-G, Flow-T
Learning starts
50,000
Entropy coefficient (α)
0.2 (initial value)
Target entropy
−dim(A) for SAC, 0 for Flow, Flow-G, Flow-T
Automatic entropy tuning
True
Number of online environment steps
1 × 106
23

--- Page 24 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3: Hyperparameters for PPO
Parameter
Value
Optimizer
Adam
Parallel envs
32
Discount factor (γ)
0.99
GAE lambda
0.95
Learning rate
6 × 10−4
Num steps
1024
Num minibatches
1
Update epochs
10
Max grad norm
10.0
Clip coefficient (ϵ)
0.2
Entropy coefficient
0.01
Total Timesteps
1 ×107
Table 4: Hyperparameters for DIME
Parameter
Value
Discount factor (γ)
0.99
Target network update rate (τ)
1.0
Policy tau
1.0
UTD
1
Policy delay
3
Batch size
512
Critic v min
-1600
Critic v max
1600
Actor lr
3 × 10−4
Critic lr
3 × 10−4
Entropy coefficient (α)
1.0 (init)
Target entropy
6.0
Total Timesteps
1 ×106
Architectures of the velocity network in flow-based policies (Figs. 9–11).
We detail the network
parameterizations for the velocity field vθ used inside the flow rollout in Equ. (4). Across all variants,
the policy starts from a state-conditioned base At0 ∼N(0, Id), performs K Euler updates Ati+1 =
Ati + ∆ti vθ(ti, Ati, s), and then applies tanh squashing to obtain the final action a = tanh(AtK).
During training, we optionally pair vθ with a log-standard-deviation head to define the per-step
Gaussian transition factors used by our noisy/likelihood-friendly rollout.
st
x0 ∼N(0, I)
t
[st; xt; t]
Shared MLPDense 256 →ReLU ×2
Mean Head µ(·)
Log-Std Head log σ(·)
Velocity ut
Euler Stepµt+1
ϵ∼N(0, I)
+
tanh(·)
at
Inputs
Flow Field
Integration
Output
Iterative Loop
Flow Policy (Classic Network)
Figure 9: The flow-based policy designed with classic networks. The velocity is modeled with an
arbitrary network; here, we use an MLP as the representative. The whole flow rollout corresponds
to the recurrent computation of the residual RNN.
Fig.
9: Classic (MLP) velocity network.
The baseline flow-based policy instantiates vθ with
a feed-forward network that is conditioned on the current intermediate action Ati, the environ-
ment state s, and the normalized time index ti. Concretely, the input token is the concatenation
[ s; Ati; ti ], followed by a shared MLP trunk and two small heads: (i) a mean head µθ(·) that
produces the deterministic velocity
vθ(ti, Ati, s) = µθ
 [s; Ati; ti]

,
and (ii) a log-standard-deviation head log σθ(·) that parameterizes the per-step transition variance
when we use the noisy rollout for likelihood-based training. Plugging this vθ into Equ. (4) yields the
standard residual update Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti µθ([s; Ati; ti]). Algebraically, this is a residual RNN
step with residual function fθ(·) = ∆ti µθ(·), matching our sequence-model view in Equ. (5).
Fig. 10: Gated velocity (Flow-G).
To stabilize gradients across the K sampling steps, we replace
the plain MLP velocity with a GRU-style gated update. Let fz (gate network) and fh (candidate
network) be two MLPs taking [s; Ati; ti] as input. Define the update gate and the candidate as
gi = σ(fz([s; Ati; ti])) ,
ˆvθ = ϕ(fh([s; Ati; ti])) ,
where σ(·) is the logistic sigmoid and ϕ(·) is a bounded activation (e.g., tanh). The gated velocity
is then
vθ(ti, Ati, s) = gi ⊙
 ˆvθ −Ati

,
24

--- Page 25 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
st
x0 ∼N(0, I)
t
[st; xt; t]
Gate Networkfz(·)
Candidate Networkfh(·)
σ
tanh
Gated Velocity vt
log σ Network
Euler Step µt+1
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
+
tanh(·)
at
Inputs
Flow Field
Integration
Output
Iterative Loop
Flow Policy as GRU
Figure 10: The flow-based policy designed with Gated velocity. The velocity is modeled with both
the gate network and the candidate network. The whole flow rollout corresponds to the recurrent
computation of GRU.
which, when inserted into Equ. (4), yields the GRU-like residual step
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti
 gi ⊙(ˆvθ −Ati)

,
exactly as in Equ. (6). Intuitively, gi interpolates between “keeping” the current intermediate action
(gi ≈0) and “rewriting” it by the candidate proposal (gi ≈1). As in Fig. 9, we also include a log σθ(·)
head for the per-step Gaussian factors used by the noisy rollout.
st
x0 ∼N(0, I)
t
Obs Enc (MLP)
Memory
Act Proj
TE(t)
+
Input Emb
Dec L1
CA/FFN+LN
Dec L2
CA/FFN+LN
Dec L3
CA/FFN+LN
Dec L4
CA/FFN+LN
Decoded Velocity µ
log σ
Euler Step
ϵ∼N(0, I)
+
tanh(·)
at
Inputs
Transformer (Decoder Layer × N)
Integration
Output
Flow Field
Iterative Loop
Flow Policy as Transformer
Figure 11: A schematic .
Fig. 11: Transformer-decoder velocity (Flow-T).
Here we implement vθ with a Transformer-
style, pre-norm residual block that conditions on the state through cross-attention. We first form
separate embeddings for the action-time token and the state:
ΦAi = EA
 ϕt(ti), Ati

,
ΦS = ES
 ϕs(s)

,
as in Equ. (7), where EA, ES are linear projections and ϕt, ϕs are positional/feature encoders. We
stack L (L = 4 in this figure) pre-norm decoder blocks. In each layer l=1, . . . , L, the action token is
refined by a state-only cross-attention and a feed-forward network (no token-to-token mixing across
time positions):
Y (l)
i
= Φ(l−1)
Ai
+ Crossl

LN
 Φ(l−1)
Ai

, context = LN(ΦS)

,
Φ(l)
Ai = Y (l)
i
+ FFNl
 LN(Y (l)
i
)

,
as Equ. (8). Finally, the decoded token is projected to the velocity space
vθ(ti, Ati, s) = Wo
 LN(Φ(L)
Ai )

,
and the rollout step follows Equ. (4):
Ati+1 = Ati + ∆ti Wo
 LN(Φ(L)
Ai )

,
which matches Equ. (9). As in the other variants, a parallel log σθ(·) head provides per-step vari-
ances for the Gaussian transition factors.
Takeaway: mapping to sequential models.
Under our sequence-model perspective, the classic
MLP velocity in Fig. 9 realizes a residual RNN step in Equ. (5), the gated velocity in Fig. 10 realizes
a GRU-style residual update in Equ. (6), and the decoded velocity in Fig. 11 realizes a Transformer
Decoder refinement in Equ. (7)–(9). All three are drop-in parameterizations of vθ inside the same
flow rollout in Equ. (4), differing only in how they regulate and condition information flow across
rollout steps.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 5: Actor (velocity) architectures inside the K-step flow rollout Ati+1 = Ati+∆t vθ(ti, Ati, s).
All variants apply tanh squashing with Jacobian correction. Notation: da:=|A|, Transformer d=64,
heads nH=4, layers nL=2.
Aspect
Classic (MLP)
Flow-G (GRU-gated)
Flow-T (Transformer-decoder)
Conditioning input
[s; Ati; ti]
[s; Ati; time emb(ti)]
Ati token + time emb
state s as memory
Backbone / blocks
MLP 256→256
ReLU
Gate: 128→da (swish)
Cand: 128→da (swish)
Decoder ×nL=2
self-only SA, cross-attn(s), FFN 4d, LN
Velocity form
vθ=µθ([s; Ati; ti])
(µθ ∈Rda)
gi=σ(fz), ˆv=50 tanh(fh)
vθ=gi ⊙(ˆv−Ati)
zi=Wo(LN(Φ(L)
Ai ))
vθ=zi
Log-std clamp
tanh to
[−5, 2]
tanh to
[−5, 2]
tanh to
[−5, 2]
Action sampling steps K
4
4
4
Notable inits / dims
–
Gate head init: W =0, b=5.0
hidden 128
d=64, nH=4, nL=2
obs-enc 32
silu
−−−→64
Per-step update
A←A + v ∆t
A←N(A, σ2)
Same as Classic
Same as Classic
E.2
OFFLINE-TO-ONLINE TRAINING SETTING
The network design in offline-to-online training is similar to the from-scratch training. Recall the
actor loss:
L(θ) = α log pc(Aθ | sh) −Qψ
 sh, aθ
h

+ β ∥aθ
h −ah∥2,
(ah, sh) ∼B.
It is observed that the setting of hyper-parameter β highly influences the training, where the regu-
larization decides whether the optimized policy stays close to or not to the policy in the buffer. We
basically adopt the same setting of β as (Li et al., 2025), where we detail in the Table 6:
Table 6: A comparison of the regularization parameter β across different environments and algo-
rithms. The notation a/b specifies the value of the regularization parameter β for the offline learning
phase (a) and the subsequent online learning phase (b). For instance, 10000/1000 indicates that
β = 10000 is used for offline training and β = 1000 for online training.
Environments
FQL
QC-FQL
Flow-G
Flow-T
scene-sparse-*
300
300
300
300
cube-double-*
300
300
300
300
cube-triple-*
300
100
100
100
cube-quadruple-100M-*
300
100
100
100
lift
10000
10000
10000/1000
10000/1000
can
10000
10000
10000/1000
10000/1000
square
10000
10000
10000/1000
10000/1000
Table 7 summarizes the actor-side architectures and hyperparameters for our offline-to-online vari-
ants. We adopt action chunking (horizon H), which has been shown to be effective on complex tasks
(Li et al., 2025). The parameter counts of Flow-G and Flow-T are less than or comparable to that of
QC-FQL. We also use fewer denoising/sampling steps K than QC-FQL to improve efficiency with-
out degrading training quality. For stability, we set the SAC target entropy to 0 and employ a fixed
sampling noise level—contrary to our from-scratch setting, where a separate network adaptively
tunes the noise schedule.
Sampling Steps Justification.
We justify our choice of sampling steps (K = 4 for our flow poli-
cies, K = 16 for diffusion baselines) based on two factors. First, this reflects the inherent efficiency
of the models, as flow-based models (especially Rectified Flow) generally require significantly fewer
integration steps than diffusion models require for denoising. Second, and most importantly, we
26

--- Page 27 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 7: Offline-to-online settings and actor-specific hyperparameters.
Aspect
QC-FQL
Flow-G
Flow-T
Actor backbone
MLP (512×4)
GELU, no LN
MLP (512×4) + gate
(h=256, swish)
Decoder nL=2, d=128
nH=4, FFN 4d
Velocity form
vθ(s, a, t) by MLP
v=z ⊙(50 tanh(ˆv) −a)
z=σ(fz)
v from decoder head
(self+cross attn)
Flow / steps
Action sampling steps
K=10
Action sampling steps
K=4
Action sampling steps
K=4
Sampling noise std
deterministic
0.10
0.10
SAC entropy (α)
N/A (no SAC)
autotune (init 0.2),
αlr=3×10−4,
¯
H=0
autotune (init 0.2),
αlr=3×10−4,
¯
H=0
Action range
tanh squash
(deterministic)
tanh + Jacobian
(for log-prob)
tanh + Jacobian
(for log-prob)
Gate init / dims
—
gate head: W =0, b=5.0
hidden 256
—
Transformer dims
—
—
d=128, nH=4, nL=2
Actor hidden dims
(512, 512, 512, 512)
(512, 512, 512, 512)
(used only in enc./FFN;
decoder per row above)
Action chunking
True
True
True
Opt / LR / WD
Adam, 3×10−4
Adam, 3×10−4
Adam, 3×10−4
Batch / γ / τ
256 / 0.99 / 0.005
256 / 0.99 / 0.005
256 / 0.99 / 0.005
adopted these values to ensure a fair and direct comparison with the key baseline papers. Our use
of 4 sampling steps for SAC Flow-G and SAC Flow-T follows the established setting in the Rein-
Flow (Zhang et al., 2025) baseline. Similarly, our use of 16 denoising steps for the diffusion-based
baselines (e.g., DIME) matches the hyperparameter used in the DIME (Celik et al., 2025) paper.
F
MORE EXPERIMENT RESULTS
In this section, we show more tested experiments.
F.1
ADDITIONAL FROM-SCRATCH RESULTS
PPO
As shown in Tab. 3, we use stabler parameter (num minibatch=1), making PPO’s data ef-
ficiency a little lower. We report PPO’s training curve over a larger number of steps in Fig. 12.
The results show that the final performance of our PPO implementation is comparable to or exceeds
other open sources results.
SAC
To ensure a fair and rigorous comparison in our main results, we intentionally applied a
unified set of hyperparameters for each method across all tasks. Consequently, SAC to exhibit
poor performance on Ant-v4 under this unified settings. In this section, we conduct additional
experiments under task-specific hyper-parameters in Tab. 8. Fig. 13 shows that with task-specific
hyperparameters, SAC baseline can indeed converge to 4700 return on Ant-v4.
Results on Tasks with Sparse Rewards
We finally test on Robomimic-Can and OGBench-cube.
Fig. 14 shows that all methods struggle on these two hard-exploration, sparse-reward tasks without
pretrain, highlighting the necessity of offline-to-online training.
Additional evaluation
Fig. 15 shows the interquartile mean (IQM) with a 95% stratified bootstrap
confidence interval as suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021).
We also report the probability-of-improvement Agarwal et al. (2021) in Fig. 16. Specifically, the
probability of improvement metric estimates the likelihood that our algorithm X outperforms a
baseline Y on a randomly selected task, formalized as P(X > Y ). Consistent with the method-
27

--- Page 28 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Hopper
(b) Walker2d
(c) HalfCheetah
(d) Ant
(e) Humanoid
(f) HumanoidStandup
Figure 12: Training curve of PPO over a larger number of steps.
Table 8: Task-specific Hyperparameters for SAC Ant-v4
Parameter
Value
Optimizer
Adam
Batch size (M)
1024
Replay buffer size
1 × 106
Discount factor (γ)
0.99
Policy learning rate
2 × 10−4
Critic learning rate
5 × 10−4
Target network update rate (τ)
0.001
Learning starts
50,000
Entropy coefficient (α)
0.2 (initial value)
Target entropy
−dim(A)
Automatic entropy tuning
True
Number of online environment steps
1 × 106
Figure 13: Training curves of SAC in
Ant-v4.
For the Ant task, SAC re-
quires careful hyperparameter tuning to
achieve stable convergence.
28

--- Page 29 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Robomimic-Can
(b) Cube-Double-Task2
Figure 14: From-scratch training results on Robomimic-Can and OGBench-cube. All methods
struggle on the hard-exploration, sparse-reward tasks without pretrain, highlighting the necessity of
offline-to-online training.
(a) Hopper-v4
(b) Walker2D-v4
(c) HalfCheetah-v4
(d) Ant-v4
(e) Humanoid-v4
(f) HumanoidStandup-v4
Figure 15: From-scratch training results on Mujoco (IQM return).
ology of Agarwal et al. (2021), we compute point estimates and 95% confidence intervals using
stratified bootstrapping with 200 resamples across all tasks and seeds. This approach provides a ro-
bust pairwise comparison that mitigates the skewing effects of outlier performances often observed
in aggregate metrics.
F.2
ADDITIONAL OFFLINE-TO-ONLINE RESULTS
Fig. 17 abd Fig. 18 shows complete offline-to-online training performance in OGBench and
Robomimic.
Additional evaluation
Fig. 19 shows the interquartile mean (IQM) with a 95% stratified boot-
strap confidence interval as suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021). We also report the probability-of-
improvement in Fig. 20.
29

--- Page 30 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Flow-T against baselines
(b) Flow-G against baselines
Figure 16: Probability-of-improvement in Mujoco benchmark. Each row shows the probability of
improvement, with 95% bootstrap CIs, that the algorithm X on the top outperforms algorithm Y on
the left, given that X was claimed to be better than Y.
F.3
ADDITIONAL ABLATION STUDY
We further analyze the sensitivity to the specifics of the GRU and transformer. In main results, we
set the default transformer parameter of Flow-T as layer=2, head=4, d model=96. Fig. 21 shows our
SAC Flow-T is robust to these three specifics of transformer.
For Flow-G, we analyze its sensitivity to gate network’s width. We set the default gate width to 512.
Fig. 22 shows that SAC Flow-G maintains stable convergence with gate width = 256. However,
insufficient capacity in the gate network leads to performance degradation (gate width=64).
F.4
FLOW-T/G CAN BE USED IN OTHER OFF-POLICY RL ALGORITHMS
SAC flow stabilizes gradients during BPTT to ensure stable off-policy RL training, functioning
independently of specific algorithms. We further extended our evaluation to TD3 Fujimoto et al.
(2018). Fig. 23 demonstrates that our Flow-T/G architecture remains effective with TD3. In contrast,
directly fine-tuning the flow using TD3 results in failure to converge or sub-optimal performance.
F.5
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS: DECOUPLING ARCHITECTURE FROM ALGORITHM
To further investigate the source of our performance gains and explicitly disentangle the contribution
of our architectural design (Flow-T) from the algorithmic objective, we conducted an additional
ablation study comparing our method against DIME (Celik et al., 2025) under identical architectural
conditions.
DIME Flow-T Implementation.
Standard DIME optimizes a variational lower bound involving a
forward process prior and a reverse path loss. To test whether these specific algorithmic components
are the drivers of performance, we implemented DIME Flow-T. This variant retains the full DIME
objective functions—including the injection of the prior gradient and the reverse path likelihood
ratio—but replaces the standard backbone with our proposed Flow-T velocity parameterization.
Results and Discussion.
We compared SAC Flow-T (our proposed method) against the new
DIME Flow-T variant. The results are illustrated in Figure 24. We observe two key findings:
30

--- Page 31 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Cube-Quadruple-
Task1
(b) Cube-Quadruple-
Task2
(c) Cube-Quadruple-
Task3
(d) Cube-Quadruple-
Task4
(e) Cube-Quadruple-
Task5
(f)
Cube-Triple-
Task1
(g)
Cube-Triple-
Task2
(h)
Cube-Triple-
Task3
(i)
Cube-Triple-
Task4
(j)
Cube-Triple-
Task5
(k)
Cube-Double-
Task1
(l)
Cube-Double-
Task2
(m)
Cube-Double-
Task3
(n)
Cube-Double-
Task4
(o)
Cube-Double-
Task5
Figure 17: Complete offline-to-online training performance in OGBench. This figure illustrates the
comprehensive training performance across all tasks. All methods are trained on 1M offline updates
followed by 1M online interaction steps. Our methods, SAC Flow-T and SAC Flow-G, achieve
competitive—often superior—performance across the evaluated benchmarks.
(a) Robomimic-Lift
(b) Robomimic-Can
(c) Robomimic-Square
Figure 18: Complete offline-to-online training performance in Robomimic.
• Architecture enhances DIME: DIME Flow-T significantly outperforms the original DIME
baseline (as shown in main results). This confirms that our Flow-T architecture provides
substantial benefits in gradient stability and expressivity, regardless of the underlying RL
objective.
• SAC Simplicity prevails: Crucially, as shown in Figure 24, SAC Flow-T consistently
matches or outperforms DIME Flow-T (e.g., in HumanoidStandup). This suggests that
the additional algorithmic complexity of DIME does not yield marginal gains once the
velocity network is properly stabilized by Flow-T.
These results, combined with the successful application of Flow-T to TD3 (Section 5), demonstrate
that the primary bottleneck in off-policy flow training is gradient instability in the rollout, which our
31

--- Page 32 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Cube-Double-Task
(b) Cube-Triple-Task
(c) Cube-Quadruple-Task
(d) Robomimic
Figure 19: Aggregated offline-to-online performance on OGBench and Robomimic benchmarks
(IQM).
(a) SAC Flow-G
(b) SAC Flow-T
Figure 20: Probability-of-improvement for offline-to-online setting on OGBench benchmarks.
Flow-T architecture effectively resolves. Once stabilized, the standard SAC objective is sufficient to
achieve state-of-the-art performance.
G
LLM USAGE DISCLOSURE
We used a large language model solely for writing polish. Its assistance was limited to grammar and
style edits, wording suggestions for titles/abstract/captions, consistency of terminology, and minor
LaTeX phrasing (e.g., figure/table captions and cross-reference text).
32

--- Page 33 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 21: Ablation study on specifics of SAC Flow-T. Our SAC Flow-T are robust to the specifics
of the transformers.
Figure 22: Ablation study on specifics of SAC Flow-G. SAC Flow-G maintains stable convergence
with reduced gate widths. However, there exists degradation in final performance when the gate
width is extremely small (64).
(a) Hopper-v4
(b) Walker-v4
(c) HumanoidStandup-v4
Figure 23: Evaluate our Flow-T/G architecture on TD3.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
(a) Hopper-v4
(b) Walker-v4
(c) HumanoidStandup-v4
Figure 24: Evaluate our Flow-T architecture on DIME loss.
34